                                              5th Edition

Fundamentals of

Engineering Thermodynamics

Michael J. Moran

The Ohio State University

Howard N. Shapiro

Iowa State University of Science and Technology

                                                                              John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Fundamentals of
Engineering
Thermodynamics
                                              5th Edition

Fundamentals of

Engineering Thermodynamics

Michael J. Moran

The Ohio State University

Howard N. Shapiro

Iowa State University of Science and Technology

                                                                              John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Copyright © 2006  John Wiley & Sons Ltd, The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester,
                  West Sussex PO19 8SQ, England

                  Telephone (+44) 1243 779777

Email (for orders and customer service enquiries): cs-books@wiley.co.uk
Visit our Home Page on www.wiley.com

All Rights Reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted in any
form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning or otherwise, except under the terms
of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988 or under the terms of a licence issued by the Copyright Licensing
Agency Ltd, 90 Tottenham Court Road, London W1T 4LP, UK, without the permission in writing of the Publisher.
Requests to the Publisher should be addressed to the Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons Ltd, The Atrium,
Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex PO19 8SQ, England, or emailed to "mailto:permreq@wiley.co.uk", or faxed to
(+44) 1243 770620.

Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as trademarks. All brand names and
product names used in this book are trade names, service marks, trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective
owners. The Publisher is not associated with any product with any product or vendor mentioned in this book.

This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information in regard to the subject matter covered. It
is sold on the understanding that the Publisher is not engaged in rendering professional services. If professional advice
or other expert assistance is required, the services of a competent professional should be sought.

Other Wiley Editorial Offices
John Wiley & Sons Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, USA
Jossey-Bass, 989 Market Street, San Francisco, CA 94103-1741, USA
Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH, Boschstr. 12, D-69469 Weinheim, Germany
John Wiley & Sons Australia Ltd, 33 Park Road, Milton, Queensland 4064, Australia
John Wiley & Sons (Asia) Pte Ltd, 2 Clementi Loop #02-01, Jin Xing Distripark, Singapore 129809
John Wiley & Sons Canada Ltd, 22 Worcester Road, Etobicoke, Ontario, Canada M9W 1L1
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in print may not be available
in electronic books.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

Moran, Michael J.
Fundamentals of engineering thermodynamics: SI version / Michael
J. Moran, Howard N. Shapiro. -- 5th ed.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN-13 978-0-470-03037-0 (pbk. : alk. paper)
ISBN-10 0-470-03037-2 (pbk. : alk. paper)
1. Thermodynamics. I. Shapiro, Howard N. II. Title.
TJ265.M66 2006
621.4021--dc22
2006008521

ISBN-13 978-0-470-03037-0
ISBN-10 0-470-03037-2

British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data

A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library

Typeset in 10/12 pt Times by Techbooks
Printed and bound in Great Britain by Scotprint, East Lothian
This book is printed on acid-free paper responsibly manufactured from sustainable forestry in which at least two trees
are planted for each one used for paper production.
 Preface

In this fifth edition we have retained the objectives of the first four editions:

 to present a thorough treatment of engineering thermodynamics from the classical viewpoint,
 to provide a sound basis for subsequent courses in fluid mechanics and heat transfer, and
 to prepare students to use thermodynamics in engineering practice.

    While the fifth edition retains the basic organization and level of the previous editions,
we have introduced several enhancements proven to be effective for student learning. In-
cluded are new text elements and interior design features that help students understand and
apply the subject matter. With this fifth edition, we aim to continue our leadership in effec-
tive pedagogy, clear and concise presentations, sound developments of the fundamentals, and
state-of-the-art engineering applications.

New in the Fifth Edition

 An engaging new feature called "Thermodynamics in the News" is intro-
    duced in every chapter. News boxes tie stories of current interest to concepts discussed
    in the chapter. The news items provide students with a broader context for their
    learning and form the basis for new Design and Open Ended problems in each chapter.

 Other class-tested content changes have been introduced:
     ­A new discussion of the state-of-the-art of fuel cell technology (Sec. 13.4).
     ­Streamlined developments of the energy concept and the first law of thermodynamics
       (Secs. 2.3 and 2.5, respectively).
     ­Streamlined developments of the mass and energy balances for a control volume
       (Secs. 4.1 and 4.2, respectively).
     ­Enhanced presentation of second law material (Chap. 5) clearly identifies key concepts.
     ­Restructuring of topics in psychrometrics (Chap. 12) and enthalpy of combustion and
       heating values (Chap. 13) further promotes student understanding.
     ­Functional use of color facilitates data retrieval from the appendix tables.

 End-of-chapter problems have been substantially refreshed. As in previous editions, a
    generous collection of problems is provided. The problems are classified under head-
    ings to assist instructors in problem selection. Problems range from confidence-building
    exercises illustrating basic skills to more challenging ones that may involve several
    components and require higher-order thinking.

 The end-of-chapter problems are organized to provide students with the opportunity to
    develop engineering skills in three modes:
     ­Conceptual. See Exercises: Things Engineers Think About.
     ­Skill Building. See Problems: Developing Engineering Skills.
     ­Design. See Design and Open ended Problems: Exploring Engineering Practice.

 The comfortable interior design from previous editions has been enhanced with an even
    more learner-centered layout aimed at enhancing student understanding.

Core Text Features

This edition continues to provide the core features that have made the text the global leader
in engineering thermodynamics education.

 Exceptional class-tested pedagogy. Our pedagogy is the model that others emulate.
    For an overview, see How to Use this Book Effectively inside the front cover of the book.

                                                                                                                                                                          v
vi Preface

             Systematic problem solving methodology. Our methodology has set the standard for
                thermodynamics texts in the way it encourages students to think systematically and
                helps them reduce errors.

             Effective development of the second law of thermodynamics. The text features the
                entropy balance (Chap. 6) recognized as the most effective way for students to learn
                how to apply the second law. Also, the presentation of exergy analysis (Chaps. 7
                and 13) has become the state-of-the-art model for learning that subject matter.

             Software to enhance problem solving for deeper learning. We pioneered the use of
                software as an effective adjunct to learning engineering thermodynamics and solving
                engineering problems.

             Sound developments of the application areas. Included in Chaps. 8­14 are compre-
                hensive developments of power and refrigeration cycles, psychrometrics, and combus-
                tion applications from which instructors can choose various levels of coverage ranging
                from short introductions to in-depth studies.

             Emphasis on engineering design and analysis. Specific text material on the design
                process is included in Sec. 1.7: Engineering Design and Analysis and Sec. 7.7:
                Thermoeconomics. Each chapter also provides carefully crafted Design and Open
                Ended Problems that allow students to develop an appreciation of engineering practice
                and to enhance a variety of skills such as creativity, formulating problems, making
                engineering judgments, and communicating their ideas.

             Flexibility in units. The text allows an SI or mixed SI / English presentation. Careful
                use of units and systematic application of unit conversion factors is emphasized
                throughout the text.

            Ways to Meet Different Course Needs

            In recognition of the evolving nature of engineering curricula, and in particular of the di-
            verse ways engineering thermodynamics is presented, the text is structured to meet a variety
            of course needs. The following table illustrates several possible uses of the text assuming a
            semester basis (3 credits). Coverage would be adjusted somewhat for courses on a quarter
            basis depending on credit value. Detailed syllabi for both semester and quarter bases are pro-
            vided on the Instructor's Web Site. Courses could be taught in the second or third year to
            engineering students with appropriate background.

            Type of course  Intended audience  Chapter coverage
                            Non-majors
            Surveys         Majors              Principles. Chaps. 1­6.
                                                Applications. Selected topics from
            Two-course      Majors
            sequences                              Chaps. 8­10 (omit compressible flow in Chap. 9).

                                                Principles. Chaps. 1­6.
                                                Applications. Same as above plus selected

                                                   topics from Chaps. 12 and 13.

                                                First course. Chaps. 1­8.
                                                   (Chap. 7 may deferred to second course or omitted.)

                                                Second course. Selected topics from
                                                   Chaps. 9­14 to meet particular course needs.
                                                                                                Preface vii

How to Use This Book Effectively

This book has several features that facilitate study and contribute further to understanding:

 Examples

 Numerous annotated solved examples are provided that feature the solution methodol-
    ogy presented in Sec. 1.7.3 and illustrated in Example 1.1. We encourage you to study
    these examples, including the accompanying comments.

 Less formal examples are given throughout the text. They open with
     for example. . . and close with . These examples also should be studied.

 Exercises

 Each chapter has a set of discussion questions under the heading Exercises: Things
   Engineers Think About that may be done on an individual or small-group basis. They
   are intended to allow you to gain a deeper understanding of the text material, think
   critically, and test yourself.

 A large number of end-of-chapter problems also are provided under the heading
    Problems: Developing Engineering Skills. The problems are sequenced to coordinate
    with the subject matter and are listed in increasing order of difficulty. The problems are
    also classified under headings to expedite the process of selecting review problems to
    solve.
    Answers to selected problems are provided in the appendix (pp. 865­868).

 Because one purpose of this book is to help you prepare to use thermodynamics in
   engineering practice, design considerations related to thermodynamics are included.
   Every chapter has a set of problems under the heading Design and Open Ended
   Problems: Exploring Engineering Practice that provide brief design experiences to help
   you develop creativity and engineering judgment. They also provide opportunities to
   practice communication skills.

 Further Study Aids

 Each chapter opens with an introduction giving the engineering context and stating the
   chapter objective.

 Each chapter concludes with a chapter summary and study guide that provides a point
   of departure for examination reviews.

 Key words are listed in the margins and coordinated with the text material at those
   locations.

 Key equations are set off by a double horizontal bar, as, for example, Eq. 1.10.
 Methodology update in the margin identifies where we refine our problem-solving

   methodology, as on p. 9, or introduce conventions such as rounding the temperature
   273.15 K to 273 K, as on p. 20.
 For quick reference, conversion factors and important constants are provided on the
   next page.
 A list of symbols is provided on the inside back cover and facing page.
viii Preface

              Constants               Standard Atmospheric Pressure
                                      1 atm  1.01325 bar
              Universal Gas Constant
              R  8.314 kJ/kmol # K

              Standard Acceleration of Gravity Temperature Relations

              g  9.80665 m /s2        T 1C2  T 1K2  273.15

              Acknowledgments

              We thank the many users of our previous editions, located at more than 200 universities and
              colleges in the United States and Canada, and over the globe, who contributed to this revi-
              sion through their comments and constructive criticism. Special thanks are owed to Prof. Ron
              Nelson, Iowa State University, for developing the EES solutions and for his assistance in up-
              dating the end-of-chapter problems and solutions. We also thank Prof. Daisie Boettner, United
              States Military Academy, West Point, for her contributions to the new discussion of fuel cell
              technology. Thanks are also due to many individuals in the John Wiley and Sons, Inc.,
              organization who have contributed their talents and energy to this edition. We appreciate their
              professionalism and commitment.

                  We are extremely gratified by the reception this book has enjoyed, and we have aimed to
              make it even more effective in this fifth edition. As always, we welcome your comments,
              criticism, and suggestions.

                                                                                                         Michael J. Moran
                                                                                                         moran.4@osu.edu

                                                                                                       Howard N. Shapiro
                                                                                                     hshapiro@iastate.edu

                 John Wiley and Sons Ltd would like to thank Brian J. Woods for his work in adapting the
              5th Edition to incorporate SI units.
Contents

1 C H A P T E R                                       4 C H A P T E R

Getting Started: Introductory                         Control Volume Analysis
Concepts and Definitions 1                            Using Energy 121

1.1 Using Thermodynamics 1                            4.1 Conservation of Mass for a Control Volume 121
1.2 Defining Systems 1                                4.2 Conservation of Energy for a Control
1.3 Describing Systems and Their Behavior 4           Volume 128
1.4 Measuring Mass, Length, Time, and Force 8         4.3 Analyzing Control Volumes at Steady
1.5 Two Measurable Properties: Specific Volume and    State 131
Pressure 10                                           4.4 Transient Analysis 152
1.6 Measuring Temperature 14                          Chapter Summary and Study Guide 162
1.7 Engineering Design and Analysis 18
Chapter Summary and Study Guide 22                    5 C H A P T E R

2 C H A P T E R                                       The Second Law of
                                                      Thermodynamics 174
Energy and the First Law of
Thermodynamics 29                                     5.1 Introducing the Second Law 174
                                                      5.2 Identifying Irreversibilities 180
2.1 Reviewing Mechanical Concepts of Energy 29        5.3 Applying the Second Law to Thermodynamic
2.2 Broading Our Understanding of Work 33             Cycles 184
2.3 Broading Our Understanding of Energy 43           5.4 Defining the Kelvin Temperature Scale 190
2.4 Energy Transfer By Heat 44                        5.5 Maximum Performance Measures for Cycles
2.5 Energy Accounting: Energy Balance for Closed      Operating Between Two Reservoirs 192
Systems 48                                            5.6 Carnot Cycle 196
2.6 Energy Analysis of Cycles 58                      Chapter Summary and Study Guide 199
Chapter Summary and Study Guide 62
                                                      6 C H A P T E R
3 C H A P T E R
                                                      Using Entropy 206
Evaluating Properties 69
                                                      6.1 Introducing Entropy 206
3.1 Fixing the State 69                               6.2 Defining Entropy Change 208
                                                      6.3 Retrieving Entropy Data 209
EVALUATING PROPERTIES: GENERAL                        6.4 Entropy Change in Internally Reversible
CONSIDERATIONS 70                                     Processes 217
3.2 p­ v­T Relation 70                                6.5 Entropy Balance for Closed Systems 220
3.3 Retrieving Thermodynamic Properties 76            6.6 Entropy Rate Balance for Control Volumes 231
3.4 Generalized Compressibility Chart 94              6.7 Isentropic Processes 240
                                                      6.8 Isentropic Efficiencies of Turbines, Nozzles,
EVALUATING PROPERTIES USING THE IDEAL                 Compressors, and Pumps 246
GAS MODEL 100                                         6.9 Heat Transfer and Work in Internally Reversible,
3.5 Ideal Gas Model 100                               Steady-State Flow Processes 254
3.6 Internal Energy, Enthalpy, and Specific Heats of  Chapter Summary and Study Guide 257
Ideal Gases 103
3.7 Evaluating u and h using Ideal Gas Tables,
Software, and Constant Specific Heats 105
3.8 Polytropic Process of an Ideal Gas 112
Chapter Summary and Study Guide 114

                                                                                                            ix
x Contents

7 C H A P T E R                                     9.12 Compressible Flow Preliminaries 426
                                                    9.13 Analyzing One-Dimensional Steady Flow in
Exergy Analysis 272                                 Nozzles and Diffusers 430
                                                    9.14 Flow in Nozzles and Diffusers of Ideal Gases
7.1 Introducing Exergy 272                          with Constant Specific Heats 436
7.2 Defining Exergy 273                             Chapter Summary and Study Guide 444
7.3 Closed System Exergy Balance 283
7.4 Flow Exergy 290                                 10 C H A P T E R
7.5 Exergy Rate Balance for Control Volumes 293
7.6 Exergetic (Second Law) Efficiency 303           Refrigeration and Heat Pump
7.7 Thermoeconomics 309                             Systems 454
Chapter Summary and Study Guide 315
                                                    10.1 Vapor Refrigeration Systems 454
8 C H A P T E R                                     10.2 Analyzing Vapor-Compression Refrigeration
                                                    Systems 457
Vapor Power Systems 325                             10.3 Refrigerant Properties 465
                                                    10.4 Cascade and Multistage Vapor-Compression
8.1 Modeling Vapor Power Systems 325                Systems 467
8.2 Analyzing Vapor Power Systems--Rankline         10.5 Absorption Refrigeration 469
Cycle 327                                           10.6 Heat Pump Systems 471
8.3 Improving Performance--Superheat and            10.7 Gas Refrigeration Systems 473
Reheat 340                                          Chapter Summary and Study Guide 479
8.4 Improving Performance--Regenerative Vapor
Power Cycle 346                                     11 C H A P T E R
8.5 Other Vapor Cycle Aspects 356
8.6 Case Study: Exergy Accounting of a Vapor Power  Thermodynamic Relations 487
Plant 358
Chapter Summary and Study Guide 365                 11.1 Using Equations of State 487
                                                    11.2 Important Mathematical Relations 494
9 C H A P T E R                                     11.3 Developing Property Relations 497
                                                    11.4 Evaluating Changes in Entropy, Internal Energy,
Gas Power Systems 373                               and Enthalpy 504
                                                    11.5 Other Thermodynamic Relations 513
INTERNAL COMBUSTION ENGINES 373                     11.6 Constructing Tables of Thermodynamic
9.1 Introducing Engine Terminology 373              Properties 520
9.2 Air-Standard Otto Cycle 375                     11.7 Generalized Charts for Enthalpy and
9.3 Air-Standard Diesel Cycle 381                   Entropy 524
9.4 Air-Standard Dual Cycle 385                     11.8 p­v­T Relations for Gas Mixtures 531
                                                    11.9 Analyzing Multicomponent Systems 536
GAS TURBINE POWER PLANTS 388                        Chapter Summary and Study Guide 548
9.5 Modeling Gas Turbine Power Plants 388
9.6 Air-Standard Brayton Cycle 389                  12 C H A P T E R
9.7 Regenerative Gas Turbines 399
9.8 Regenerative Gas Turbines with Reheat and       Ideal Gas Mixtures
Intercooling 404                                    and Psychrometrics
9.9 Gas Turbines for Aircraft Propulsion 414        Applications 558
9.10 Combined Gas Turbine--Vapor Power
Cycle 419                                           IDEAL GAS MIXTURES:
9.11 Ericsson and Stirling Cycles 424               GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS 558
                                                    12.1 Describing Mixture Composition 558
COMPRESSIBLE FLOW THROUGH NOZZLES AND               12.2 Relating p, V, and T for Ideal Gas Mixtures 562
DIFFUSERS 426
                                                      Contents xi

12.3 Evaluating U, H, S and Specific Heats 564        14 C H A P T E R
12.4 Analyzing Systems Involving Mixtures 566
                                                      Chemical and Phase
PSYCHROMETRIC APPLICATIONS 579                        Equilibrium 679
12.5 Introducing Psychrometric Principles 579
12.6 Psychrometers: Measuring the Wet-Bulb and        EQUILIBRIUM FUNDAMENTALS 679
Dry-Bulb Temperatures 590                             14.1 Introducing Equilibrium Criteria 679
12.7 Psychrometric Charts 592                         CHEMICAL EQUILIBRIUM 684
12.8 Analyzing Air-Conditioning Processes 593         14.2 Equation of Reaction Equilibrium 684
12.9 Cooling Towers 609                               14.3 Calculating Equilibrium Compositions 686
Chapter Summary and Study Guide 611                   14.4 Further Examples of the Use of the Equilibrium
                                                      Constant 695
13 C H A P T E R                                      PHASE EQUILIBRIUM 704
                                                      14.5 Equilibrium Between Two Phases of a Pure
Reacting Mixtures and                                 Substance 705
Combustion 620                                        14.6 Equilibrium of Multicomponent, Multiphase
                                                      Systems 706
COMBUSTION FUNDAMENTALS 620                           Chapter Summary and Study Guide 711
13.1 Introducing Combustion 620
13.2 Conservation of Energy--Reacting                 APPENDIX
Systems 629
13.3 Determining the Adiabatic Flame                  Appendix Tables, Figures, and
Temperature 641                                       Charts 718
13.4 Fuel Cells 645
13.5 Absolute Entropy and the Third Law of            Index to Tables in SI Units 718
Thermodynamics 648                                    Index to Figures and Charts 814

CHEMICAL EXERGY 655                                   Answers to Selected Problems 822
13.6 Introducing Chemical Exergy 655
13.7 Standard Chemical Exergy 659                     Index 825
13.8 Exergy Summary 664
13.9 Exergetic (Second Law) Efficiencies of Reacting
Systems 667
Chapter Summary and Study Guide 669
Getting Started:  C
Introductory      H
Concepts and      A
Definitions       P
                  T

                  1 E

                  R

E N G I N E E R I N G C O N T E X T The word thermodynamics stems from                           chapter objective
the Greek words therme (heat) and dynamis (force). Although various aspects of what is
now known as thermodynamics have been of interest since antiquity, the formal study of
thermodynamics began in the early nineteenth century through consideration of the motive
power of heat: the capacity of hot bodies to produce work. Today the scope is larger,
dealing generally with energy and with relationships among the properties of matter.

   Thermodynamics is both a branch of physics and an engineering science. The scientist
is normally interested in gaining a fundamental understanding of the physical and chemical
behavior of fixed quantities of matter at rest and uses the principles of thermodynamics to
relate the properties of matter. Engineers are generally interested in studying systems and
how they interact with their surroundings. To facilitate this, engineers extend the subject of
thermodynamics to the study of systems through which matter flows.

   The objective of this chapter is to introduce you to some of the fundamental concepts
and definitions that are used in our study of engineering thermodynamics. In most instances
the introduction is brief, and further elaboration is provided in subsequent chapters.

1.1 Using Thermodynamics

Engineers use principles drawn from thermodynamics and other engineering sciences, such
as fluid mechanics and heat and mass transfer, to analyze and design things intended to meet
human needs. The wide realm of application of these principles is suggested by Table 1.1,
which lists a few of the areas where engineering thermodynamics is important. Engineers
seek to achieve improved designs and better performance, as measured by factors such as an
increase in the output of some desired product, a reduced input of a scarce resource, a
reduction in total costs, or a lesser environmental impact. The principles of engineering
thermodynamics play an important part in achieving these goals.

1.2 Defining Systems

An important step in any engineering analysis is to describe precisely what is being studied.
In mechanics, if the motion of a body is to be determined, normally the first step is to de-
fine a free body and identify all the forces exerted on it by other bodies. Newton's second

                                                                                                                                                                          1
2 Chapter 1 Getting Started: Introductory Concepts and Definitions                                        Solar-cell arrays

TABLE 1.1 Selected Areas of Application of Engineering Thermodynamics           Surfaces with thermal
                                                                                    control coatings
 Automobile engines
 Turbines                                                                      International Space Station
 Compressors, pumps
 Fossil- and nuclear-fueled power stations
 Propulsion systems for aircraft and rockets
 Combustion systems
 Cryogenic systems, gas separation, and liquefaction
 Heating, ventilating, and air-conditioning systems

    Vapor compression and absorption refrigeration
    Heat pumps
 Cooling of electronic equipment
 Alternative energy systems
    Fuel cells
    Thermoelectric and thermionic devices
    Magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) converters
    Solar-activated heating, cooling, and power generation
    Geothermal systems
    Ocean thermal, wave, and tidal power generation
    Wind power
 Biomedical applications
    Life-support systems
    Artificial organs

              Steam generator

                                     Combustion                      Electric
                                     gas cleanup         Stack power

              Coal                   Air Steam  Turbine                        Cooling
                        Ash                                                     tower
                                                          Generator
                                                         Condenser

Refrigerator                         Condensate                                                  Automobile engine
                                                       Cooling water

                                        Electrical power plant

                                                                                        Trachea

                                                                                                                             Lung

                            Fuel in  Turbine
              Compressor Combustor
                                                     Hot gases
Air in                                                   out

              Turbojet engine                                                               Heart
                                                                                        Biomedical applications
                                                                                                 1.2 Defining Systems 3

law of motion is then applied. In thermodynamics the term system is used to identify the         system
subject of the analysis. Once the system is defined and the relevant interactions with other
systems are identified, one or more physical laws or relations are applied.                      surroundings
                                                                                                 boundary
   The system is whatever we want to study. It may be as simple as a free body or as com-
plex as an entire chemical refinery. We may want to study a quantity of matter contained
within a closed, rigid-walled tank, or we may want to consider something such as a pipeline
through which natural gas flows. The composition of the matter inside the system may be
fixed or may be changing through chemical or nuclear reactions. The shape or volume of the
system being analyzed is not necessarily constant, as when a gas in a cylinder is compressed
by a piston or a balloon is inflated.

   Everything external to the system is considered to be part of the system's surroundings.
The system is distinguished from its surroundings by a specified boundary, which may be
at rest or in motion. You will see that the interactions between a system and its surround-
ings, which take place across the boundary, play an important part in engineering thermo-
dynamics. It is essential for the boundary to be delineated carefully before proceeding with
any thermodynamic analysis. However, the same physical phenomena often can be analyzed
in terms of alternative choices of the system, boundary, and surroundings. The choice of a
particular boundary defining a particular system is governed by the convenience it allows in
the subsequent analysis.

TYPES OF SYSTEMS

Two basic kinds of systems are distinguished in this book. These are referred to, respectively,  closed system
as closed systems and control volumes. A closed system refers to a fixed quantity of matter,     isolated system
whereas a control volume is a region of space through which mass may flow.
                                                                                                 control volume
   A closed system is defined when a particular quantity of matter is under study. A closed
system always contains the same matter. There can be no transfer of mass across its bound-       Gas              Boundary
ary. A special type of closed system that does not interact in any way with its surroundings
is called an isolated system.                                                                     Figure 1.1 Closed
                                                                                                 system: A gas in a
   Figure 1.1 shows a gas in a piston­cylinder assembly. When the valves are closed, we can      piston­cylinder assembly.
consider the gas to be a closed system. The boundary lies just inside the piston and cylinder
walls, as shown by the dashed lines on the figure. The portion of the boundary between the
gas and the piston moves with the piston. No mass would cross this or any other part of the
boundary.

   In subsequent sections of this book, thermodynamic analyses are made of devices such
as turbines and pumps through which mass flows. These analyses can be conducted in prin-
ciple by studying a particular quantity of matter, a closed system, as it passes through the
device. In most cases it is simpler to think instead in terms of a given region of space
through which mass flows. With this approach, a region within a prescribed boundary is
studied. The region is called a control volume. Mass may cross the boundary of a control
volume.

   A diagram of an engine is shown in Fig. 1.2a. The dashed line defines a control volume
that surrounds the engine. Observe that air, fuel, and exhaust gases cross the boundary. A
schematic such as in Fig. 1.2b often suffices for engineering analysis.

   The term control mass is sometimes used in place of closed system, and the term open
system is used interchangeably with control volume. When the terms control mass and con-
trol volume are used, the system boundary is often referred to as a control surface.

   In general, the choice of system boundary is governed by two considerations: (1) what is
known about a possible system, particularly at its boundaries, and (2) the objective of the
analysis.  for example. . . Figure 1.3 shows a sketch of an air compressor connected
to a storage tank. The system boundary shown on the figure encloses the compressor, tank,
and all of the piping. This boundary might be selected if the electrical power input were
4 Chapter 1 Getting Started: Introductory Concepts and Definitions

Air in       Drive                                                                                   Air in
             shaft
                                                                                                             Fuel in
                 Exhaust
                  gas out
                 Fuel in

                                                                                                             Drive
                                                                                                             shaft

                                                                                                             Exhaust
                                                                                                             gas out

        Boundary (control surface)                                       Boundary (control surface)

        (a)                                                                                          (b)

 Figure 1.2 Example of a control volume (open system). An automobile engine.

known, and the objective of the analysis were to determine how long the compressor must
operate for the pressure in the tank to rise to a specified value. Since mass crosses the
boundary, the system would be a control volume. A control volume enclosing only the com-
pressor might be chosen if the condition of the air entering and exiting the compressor were
known, and the objective were to determine the electric power input. 

1.3 Describing Systems and Their Behavior

Engineers are interested in studying systems and how they interact with their surroundings.
In this section, we introduce several terms and concepts used to describe systems and how
they behave.

MACROSCOPIC AND MICROSCOPIC VIEWS OF THERMODYNAMICS

Systems can be studied from a macroscopic or a microscopic point of view. The macro-
scopic approach to thermodynamics is concerned with the gross or overall behavior. This
is sometimes called classical thermodynamics. No model of the structure of matter at the
molecular, atomic, and subatomic levels is directly used in classical thermodynamics.
Although the behavior of systems is affected by molecular structure, classical thermody-
namics allows important aspects of system behavior to be evaluated from observations of
the overall system.

                                                                    Air

Tank
                               Air compressor

                                                                      Figure 1.3 Air compressor and
                                                             ­ + storage tank.
                                                                                                        1.3 Describing Systems and Their Behavior 5

   The microscopic approach to thermodynamics, known as statistical thermodynamics, is
concerned directly with the structure of matter. The objective of statistical thermodynamics
is to characterize by statistical means the average behavior of the particles making up a system
of interest and relate this information to the observed macroscopic behavior of the system.
For applications involving lasers, plasmas, high-speed gas flows, chemical kinetics, very low
temperatures (cryogenics), and others, the methods of statistical thermodynamics are essen-
tial. Moreover, the microscopic approach is instrumental in developing certain data, for
example, ideal gas specific heats (Sec. 3.6).

   For the great majority of engineering applications, classical thermodynamics not only pro-
vides a considerably more direct approach for analysis and design but also requires far fewer
mathematical complications. For these reasons the macroscopic viewpoint is the one adopted
in this book. When it serves to promote understanding, however, concepts are interpreted
from the microscopic point of view. Finally, relativity effects are not significant for the systems
under consideration in this book.

PROPERTY, STATE, AND PROCESS

To describe a system and predict its behavior requires knowledge of its properties and how         property
those properties are related. A property is a macroscopic characteristic of a system such as
mass, volume, energy, pressure, and temperature to which a numerical value can be assigned         state
at a given time without knowledge of the previous behavior (history) of the system. Many           process
other properties are considered during the course of our study of engineering thermody-            steady state
namics. Thermodynamics also deals with quantities that are not properties, such as mass flow       thermodynamic cycle
rates and energy transfers by work and heat. Additional examples of quantities that are not
properties are provided in subsequent chapters. A way to distinguish nonproperties from prop-
erties is given shortly.

   The word state refers to the condition of a system as described by its properties. Since
there are normally relations among the properties of a system, the state often can be speci-
fied by providing the values of a subset of the properties. All other properties can be deter-
mined in terms of these few.

   When any of the properties of a system change, the state changes and the system is said
to have undergone a process. A process is a transformation from one state to another. How-
ever, if a system exhibits the same values of its properties at two different times, it is in the
same state at these times. A system is said to be at steady state if none of its properties
changes with time.

   A thermodynamic cycle is a sequence of processes that begins and ends at the same state.
At the conclusion of a cycle all properties have the same values they had at the beginning.
Consequently, over the cycle the system experiences no net change of state. Cycles that are
repeated periodically play prominent roles in many areas of application. For example, steam
circulating through an electrical power plant executes a cycle.

   At a given state each property has a definite value that can be assigned without knowl-
edge of how the system arrived at that state. Therefore, the change in value of a property as
the system is altered from one state to another is determined solely by the two end states and
is independent of the particular way the change of state occurred. That is, the change is in-
dependent of the details of the process. Conversely, if the value of a quantity is independent
of the process between two states, then that quantity is the change in a property. This pro-
vides a test for determining whether a quantity is a property: A quantity is a property if its
change in value between two states is independent of the process. It follows that if the value
of a particular quantity depends on the details of the process, and not solely on the end states,
that quantity cannot be a property.
6 Chapter 1 Getting Started: Introductory Concepts and Definitions

extensive property  EXTENSIVE AND INTENSIVE PROPERTIES
intensive property
                    Thermodynamic properties can be placed in two general classes: extensive and intensive.
                    A property is called extensive if its value for an overall system is the sum of its values for
                    the parts into which the system is divided. Mass, volume, energy, and several other proper-
                    ties introduced later are extensive. Extensive properties depend on the size or extent of a
                    system. The extensive properties of a system can change with time, and many thermody-
                    namic analyses consist mainly of carefully accounting for changes in extensive properties
                    such as mass and energy as a system interacts with its surroundings.

                       Intensive properties are not additive in the sense previously considered. Their values are
                    independent of the size or extent of a system and may vary from place to place within the
                    system at any moment. Thus, intensive properties may be functions of both position and time,
                    whereas extensive properties vary at most with time. Specific volume (Sec. 1.5), pressure,
                    and temperature are important intensive properties; several other intensive properties are in-
                    troduced in subsequent chapters.

                        for example. . . to illustrate the difference between extensive and intensive prop-
                    erties, consider an amount of matter that is uniform in temperature, and imagine that it is
                    composed of several parts, as illustrated in Fig. 1.4. The mass of the whole is the sum of the
                    masses of the parts, and the overall volume is the sum of the volumes of the parts. However,
                    the temperature of the whole is not the sum of the temperatures of the parts; it is the same
                    for each part. Mass and volume are extensive, but temperature is intensive. 

phase               PHASE AND PURE SUBSTANCE
pure substance
                    The term phase refers to a quantity of matter that is homogeneous throughout in both chem-
                    ical composition and physical structure. Homogeneity in physical structure means that the
                    matter is all solid, or all liquid, or all vapor (or equivalently all gas). A system can contain
                    one or more phases. For example, a system of liquid water and water vapor (steam) con-
                    tains two phases. When more than one phase is present, the phases are separated by phase
                    boundaries. Note that gases, say oxygen and nitrogen, can be mixed in any proportion to
                    form a single gas phase. Certain liquids, such as alcohol and water, can be mixed to form
                    a single liquid phase. But liquids such as oil and water, which are not miscible, form two
                    liquid phases.

                       A pure substance is one that is uniform and invariable in chemical composition. A pure
                    substance can exist in more than one phase, but its chemical composition must be the same
                    in each phase. For example, if liquid water and water vapor form a system with two phases,
                    the system can be regarded as a pure substance because each phase has the same composi-
                    tion. A uniform mixture of gases can be regarded as a pure substance provided it remains a
                    gas and does not react chemically. Changes in composition due to chemical reaction are

                    (a)                                             (b)

                     Figure 1.4 Figure used to discuss the extensive and intensive property concepts.
                                                                                                        1.3 Describing Systems and Their Behavior 7

considered in Chap. 13. A system consisting of air can be regarded as a pure substance as
long as it is a mixture of gases; but if a liquid phase should form on cooling, the liquid would
have a different composition from the gas phase, and the system would no longer be con-
sidered a pure substance.

EQUILIBRIUM

Classical thermodynamics places primary emphasis on equilibrium states and changes from            equilibrium
one equilibrium state to another. Thus, the concept of equilibrium is fundamental. In mechanics,   equilibrium state
equilibrium means a condition of balance maintained by an equality of opposing forces. In
thermodynamics, the concept is more far-reaching, including not only a balance of forces but
also a balance of other influences. Each kind of influence refers to a particular aspect of ther-
modynamic, or complete, equilibrium. Accordingly, several types of equilibrium must exist in-
dividually to fulfill the condition of complete equilibrium; among these are mechanical, ther-
mal, phase, and chemical equilibrium.

   Criteria for these four types of equilibrium are considered in subsequent discussions.
For the present, we may think of testing to see if a system is in thermodynamic equilib-
rium by the following procedure: Isolate the system from its surroundings and watch for
changes in its observable properties. If there are no changes, we conclude that the sys-
tem was in equilibrium at the moment it was isolated. The system can be said to be at an
equilibrium state.

   When a system is isolated, it does not interact with its surroundings; however, its state
can change as a consequence of spontaneous events occurring internally as its intensive prop-
erties, such as temperature and pressure, tend toward uniform values. When all such changes
cease, the system is in equilibrium. Hence, for a system to be in equilibrium it must be a
single phase or consist of a number of phases that have no tendency to change their condi-
tions when the overall system is isolated from its surroundings. At equilibrium, temperature
is uniform throughout the system. Also, pressure can be regarded as uniform throughout as
long as the effect of gravity is not significant; otherwise a pressure variation can exist, as in
a vertical column of liquid.

ACTUAL AND QUASIEQUILIBRIUM PROCESSES

There is no requirement that a system undergoing an actual process be in equilibrium during        quasiequilibrium
the process. Some or all of the intervening states may be nonequilibrium states. For many          process
such processes we are limited to knowing the state before the process occurs and the state
after the process is completed. However, even if the intervening states of the system are not
known, it is often possible to evaluate certain overall effects that occur during the process.
Examples are provided in the next chapter in the discussions of work and heat. Typically,
nonequilibrium states exhibit spatial variations in intensive properties at a given time. Also,
at a specified position intensive properties may vary with time, sometimes chaotically. Spa-
tial and temporal variations in properties such as temperature, pressure, and velocity can be
measured in certain cases. It may also be possible to obtain this information by solving ap-
propriate governing equations, expressed in the form of differential equations, either analyt-
ically or by computer.

   Processes are sometimes modeled as an idealized type of process called a quasiequilibr-
ium (or quasistatic) process. A quasiequilibrium process is one in which the departure from
thermodynamic equilibrium is at most infinitesimal. All states through which the system
passes in a quasiequilibrium process may be considered equilibrium states. Because
nonequilibrium effects are inevitably present during actual processes, systems of engineer-
ing interest can at best approach, but never realize, a quasiequilibrium process.
8 Chapter 1 Getting Started: Introductory Concepts and Definitions

                                    Our interest in the quasiequilibrium process concept stems mainly from two consider-
                                ations:

                                 Simple thermodynamic models giving at least qualitative information about the behav-
                                    ior of actual systems of interest often can be developed using the quasiequilibrium
                                    process concept. This is akin to the use of idealizations such as the point mass or the
                                    frictionless pulley in mechanics for the purpose of simplifying an analysis.

                                 The quasiequilibrium process concept is instrumental in deducing relationships that
                                    exist among the properties of systems at equilibrium (Chaps. 3, 6, and 11).

base unit      1.4 Measuring Mass, Length, Time, and Force
SI base units
               When engineering calculations are performed, it is necessary to be concerned with the units
               of the physical quantities involved. A unit is any specified amount of a quantity by compar-
               ison with which any other quantity of the same kind is measured. For example, meters, cen-
               timeters, kilometers, feet, inches, and miles are all units of length. Seconds, minutes, and
               hours are alternative time units.

                   Because physical quantities are related by definitions and laws, a relatively small number
               of physical quantities suffice to conceive of and measure all others. These may be called
               primary dimensions. The others may be measured in terms of the primary dimensions and
               are called secondary. For example, if length and time were regarded as primary, velocity and
               area would be secondary.

                   Two commonly used sets of primary dimensions that suffice for applications in mechanics
               are (1) mass, length, and time and (2) force, mass, length, and time. Additional primary
               dimensions are required when additional physical phenomena come under consideration.
               Temperature is included for thermodynamics, and electric current is introduced for applica-
               tions involving electricity.

                   Once a set of primary dimensions is adopted, a base unit for each primary dimension is
               specified. Units for all other quantities are then derived in terms of the base units. Let us
               illustrate these ideas by considering briefly the SI system of units.

                1.4.1 SI Units

               The system of units called SI, takes mass, length, and time as primary dimensions and re-
               gards force as secondary. SI is the abbreviation for Systčme International d'Unités (Interna-
               tional System of Units), which is the legally accepted system in most countries. The con-
               ventions of the SI are published and controlled by an international treaty organization. The
               SI base units for mass, length, and time are listed in Table 1.2 and discussed in the follow-
               ing paragraphs. The SI base unit for temperature is the kelvin, K.

                   The SI base unit of mass is the kilogram, kg. It is equal to the mass of a particular cylin-
               der of platinum­iridium alloy kept by the International Bureau of Weights and Measures near
               Paris. The mass standard for the United States is maintained by the National Institute of Stan-
               dards and Technology. The kilogram is the only base unit still defined relative to a fabricated
               object.

                   The SI base unit of length is the meter (metre), m, defined as the length of the path traveled
               by light in a vacuum during a specified time interval. The base unit of time is the second, s.
               The second is defined as the duration of 9,192,631,770 cycles of the radiation associated
               with a specified transition of the cesium atom.

                   The SI unit of force, called the newton, is a secondary unit, defined in terms of the base
               units for mass, length, and time. Newton's second law of motion states that the net force
               acting on a body is proportional to the product of the mass and the acceleration, written
                                                                                   1.4 Measuring Mass, Length, Time, and Force 9

TABLE 1.2 Units and dimensions for Mass, Length, Time

                                        SI

Quantity        Unit              Dimension              Symbol

mass            kilogram                M                           kg

length          meter                   L                           m

time            second                  t                           s

F  ma. The newton is defined so that the proportionality constant in the expression is equal
to unity. That is, Newton's second law is expressed as the equality

                                            F  ma                                    (1.1)

The newton, N, is the force required to accelerate a mass of 1 kilogram at the rate of 1 meter
per second per second. With Eq. 1.1

                          1 N  11 kg2 11 m/s22  1 kg # m/s2                          (1.2)

    for example. . . to illustrate the use of the SI units introduced thus far, let us           METHODOLOGY
determine the weight in newtons of an object whose mass is 1000 kg, at a place on the earth's    UPDATE
surface where the acceleration due to gravity equals a standard value defined as 9.80665 m /s2.
Recalling that the weight of an object refers to the force of gravity, and is calculated using   Observe that in the cal-
the mass of the object, m, and the local acceleration of gravity, g, with Eq. 1.1 we get         culation of force in
                                                                                                 newtons, the unit
                F  mg                                                                            conversion factor is set
                   11000 kg2 19.80665 m/s22  9806.65 kg # m/s2                                   off by a pair of vertical
                                                                                                 lines. This device is used
This force can be expressed in terms of the newton by using Eq. 1.2 as a unit conversion         throughout the text to
factor. That is                                                                                  identify unit conversions.

                F       a9806.65  kg #  m  b  `       1  N       `      9806.65 N  
                                    s2              kg   # m/s2
                                                 1

   Since weight is calculated in terms of the mass and the local acceleration due to gravity,
the weight of an object can vary because of the variation of the acceleration of gravity with
location, but its mass remains constant.  for example. . . if the object considered pre-
viously were on the surface of a planet at a point where the acceleration of gravity is, say,
one-tenth of the value used in the above calculation, the mass would remain the same but
the weight would be one-tenth of the calculated value. 

   SI units for other physical quantities are also derived in terms of the SI base units. Some
of the derived units occur so frequently that they are given special names and symbols, such
as the newton. SI units for quantities pertinent to thermodynamics are given in Table 1.3.

TABLE 1.3          Dimensions                          Units            Symbol        Name

  Quantity          Lt1                          m/s                       N         newtons
                    Lt2                          m/s2                      Pa        pascal
  Velocity          MLt2                         kg m/s2                    J        joule
  Acceleration      ML1 t2                       kg m/s2 (N/m2)            W         watt
  Force             ML2 t2                       kg m2/s2 (N m)
  Pressure          ML2 t3                       kg m2/s3 (J/s)
  Energy
  Power
10 Chapter 1 Getting Started: Introductory Concepts and Definitions

TABLE 1.4 SI Unit     Since it is frequently necessary to work with extremely large or small values when using the
Prefixes              SI unit system, a set of standard prefixes is provided in Table 1.4 to simplify matters. For
                      example, km denotes kilometer, that is, 103 m.
Factor Prefix Symbol
                       1.4.2 English Engineering Units
1012  tera T
109   giga G          Although SI units are the worldwide standard, at the present time many segments of the en-
106   mega M          gineering community in the United States regularly use some other units. A large portion of
103   kilo k          America's stock of tools and industrial machines and much valuable engineering data utilize
102   hecto h         units other than SI units. For many years to come, engineers in the United States will have
102   centi c         to be conversant with a variety of units.
103   milli m
106   micro           1.5 Two Measurable Properties: Specific
109   nano n                   Volume and Pressure
1012  pico p
                      Three intensive properties that are particularly important in engineering thermodynamics are
                      specific volume, pressure, and temperature. In this section specific volume and pressure are
                      considered. Temperature is the subject of Sec. 1.6.

                       1.5.1 Specific Volume

                      From the macroscopic perspective, the description of matter is simplified by considering it
                      to be distributed continuously throughout a region. The correctness of this idealization, known
                      as the continuum hypothesis, is inferred from the fact that for an extremely large class of
                      phenomena of engineering interest the resulting description of the behavior of matter is in
                      agreement with measured data.

                         When substances can be treated as continua, it is possible to speak of their intensive
                      thermodynamic properties "at a point." Thus, at any instant the density  at a point is
                      defined as

                                                                        m
                                              r  lim a b                     (1.3)
                                                                     VSVż V

                      where V is the smallest volume for which a definite value of the ratio exists. The volume
                      V contains enough particles for statistical averages to be significant. It is the smallest vol-
                      ume for which the matter can be considered a continuum and is normally small enough that
                      it can be considered a "point." With density defined by Eq. 1.8, density can be described
                      mathematically as a continuous function of position and time.

                         The density, or local mass per unit volume, is an intensive property that may vary from
                      point to point within a system. Thus, the mass associated with a particular volume V is
                      determined in principle by integration

                                               m  r dV                       (1.4)

                                                                     V

specific volume       and not simply as the product of density and volume.

                        The specific volume v is defined as the reciprocal of the density, v  1r. It is the volume

                      per unit mass. Like density, specific volume is an intensive property and may vary from point
                      to point. SI units for density and specific volume are kg/m3 and m3/kg, respectively. How-
                      ever, they are also often expressed, respectively, as g/cm3 and cm3/g.

                         In certain applications it is convenient to express properties such as a specific volume

                      on a molar basis rather than on a mass basis. The amount of a substance can be given on a
                        1.5 Two Measurable Properties: Specific Volume and Pressure 11

molar basis in terms of the kilomole (kmol) or the pound mole (lbmol), as appropriate. In molar basis
either case we use

                 n m                                                     (1.5)
                 M

The number of kilomoles of a substance, n, is obtained by dividing the mass, m, in kilograms
by the molecular weight, M, in kg/kmol. Appendix Table A-1 provides molecular weights for
several substances.

   To signal that a property is on a molar basis, a bar is used over its symbol. Thus, v sig-
nifies the volume per kmol. In this text, the units used for v are m3/kmol. With Eq. 1.10, the
relationship between v and v is

                 v  Mv                                                   (1.6)

where M is the molecular weight in kg/kmol or lb/lbmol, as appropriate.

 1.5.2 Pressure

Next, we introduce the concept of pressure from the continuum viewpoint. Let us begin by con-        pressure
sidering a small area A passing through a point in a fluid at rest. The fluid on one side of the
area exerts a compressive force on it that is normal to the area, Fnormal. An equal but oppositely
directed force is exerted on the area by the fluid on the other side. For a fluid at rest, no other
forces than these act on the area. The pressure p at the specified point is defined as the limit

                 p  lim a Fnormal b                                      (1.7)
                      ASAż A

where A is the area at the "point" in the same limiting sense as used in the definition of
density.

   If the area A was given new orientations by rotating it around the given point, and the
pressure determined for each new orientation, it would be found that the pressure at the point
is the same in all directions as long as the fluid is at rest. This is a consequence of the
equilibrium of forces acting on an element of volume surrounding the point. However, the
pressure can vary from point to point within a fluid at rest; examples are the variation of at-
mospheric pressure with elevation and the pressure variation with depth in oceans, lakes, and
other bodies of water.

   Consider next a fluid in motion. In this case the force exerted on an area passing through
a point in the fluid may be resolved into three mutually perpendicular components: one normal
to the area and two in the plane of the area. When expressed on a unit area basis, the com-
ponent normal to the area is called the normal stress, and the two components in the plane
of the area are termed shear stresses. The magnitudes of the stresses generally vary with the
orientation of the area. The state of stress in a fluid in motion is a topic that is normally
treated thoroughly in fluid mechanics. The deviation of a normal stress from the pressure,
the normal stress that would exist were the fluid at rest, is typically very small. In this book
we assume that the normal stress at a point is equal to the pressure at that point. This as-
sumption yields results of acceptable accuracy for the applications considered.

PRESSURE UNITS

The SI unit of pressure and stress is the pascal.
                                            1 pascal  1 N/m2
12 Chapter 1 Getting Started: Introductory Concepts and Definitions

                   However, in this text it is convenient to work with multiples of the pascal: the kPa, the bar,
                   and the MPa.

                                                   1 kPa  103 N/m2
                                                   1 bar  105 N/m2
                                                  1 MPa  106 N/m2

                   Although atmospheric pressure varies with location on the earth, a standard reference value
                   can be defined and used to express other pressures.

                                    1 standard atmosphere 1atm2  1.01325  105 N/m2

absolute pressure     Pressure as discussed above is called absolute pressure. Throughout this book the term
                   pressure refers to absolute pressure unless explicitly stated otherwise. Although absolute pres-
gage pressure      sures must be used in thermodynamic relations, pressure-measuring devices often indicate
vacuum pressure    the difference between the absolute pressure in a system and the absolute pressure of the
                   atmosphere existing outside the measuring device. The magnitude of the difference is called
                   a gage pressure or a vacuum pressure. The term gage pressure is applied when the pressure
                   in the system is greater than the local atmospheric pressure, patm.

                                    p1gage2  p1absolute2  patm1absolute2                          (1.8)

                   When the local atmospheric pressure is greater than the pressure in the system, the term vac-
                   uum pressure is used.

                                    p1vacuum2  patm1absolute2  p1absolute2                        (1.9)

                   The relationship among the various ways of expressing pressure measurements is shown in
                   Fig. 1.5.

                                                  p (gage)

                   Absolute         p (absolute)                                     Atmospheric
                   pressure                                                          pressure
                   that is greater
                   than the local                                    p (vacuum)
                   atmospheric
                   pressure

                                                     patm                       Absolute
                                                  (absolute)                    pressure that
                                                                                is less than
                                                                  p (absolute)  than the local
                                                                                atmospheric
                                                                                pressure

                   Zero pressure                                                Zero pressure

                    Figure 1.5 Relationships among the absolute, atmospheric, gage, and
                   vacuum pressures.
                                          1.5 Two Measurable Properties: Specific Volume and Pressure 13

PRESSURE MEASUREMENT                                                                                                 patm
                                                                                                     Gas at
Two commonly used devices for measuring pressure are the manometer and the Bourdon
tube. Manometers measure pressure differences in terms of the length of a column of liquid           pressure p
such as water, mercury, or oil. The manometer shown in Fig. 1.6 has one end open to the at-
mosphere and the other attached to a closed vessel containing a gas at uniform pressure. The         L
difference between the gas pressure and that of the atmosphere is

                                                                                               Tank

                  p  patm  rgL            (1.10)

where  is the density of the manometer liquid, g the acceleration of gravity, and L the dif-                     Manometer
ference in the liquid levels. For short columns of liquid,  and g may be taken as constant.                      liquid
Because of this proportionality between pressure difference and manometer fluid length, pres-
sures are often expressed in terms of millimeters of mercury, inches of water, and so on. It    Figure 1.6 Pressure
is left as an exercise to develop Eq. 1.15 using an elementary force balance.                  measurement by a
                                                                                               manometer.
   A Bourdon tube gage is shown in Fig. 1.7. The figure shows a curved tube having an
elliptical cross section with one end attached to the pressure to be measured and the other
end connected to a pointer by a mechanism. When fluid under pressure fills the tube, the
elliptical section tends to become circular, and the tube straightens. This motion is
transmitted by the mechanism to the pointer. By calibrating the deflection of the pointer
for known pressures, a graduated scale can be determined from which any applied pres-
sure can be read in suitable units. Because of its construction, the Bourdon tube meas-
ures the pressure relative to the pressure of the surroundings existing at the instrument.
Accordingly, the dial reads zero when the inside and outside of the tube are at the same
pressure.

   Pressure can be measured by other means as well. An important class of sensors utilize the
piezoelectric effect: A charge is generated within certain solid materials when they are de-
formed. This mechanical input /electrical output provides the basis for pressure measurement
as well as displacement and force measurements. Another important type of sensor employs
a diaphragm that deflects when a force is applied, altering an inductance, resistance, or
capacitance. Figure 1.8 shows a piezoelectric pressure sensor together with an automatic data
acquisition system.

Elliptical metal  Pointer
Bourdon tube

Support           Pinion
                  gear

                  Linkage

                       Gas at pressure p   Figure 1.8 Pressure sensor with automatic data
                                          acquisition.
 Figure 1.7 Pressure measurement by a
Bourdon tube gage.
14 Chapter 1 Getting Started: Introductory Concepts and Definitions

        1.6 Measuring Temperature

                                In this section the intensive property temperature is considered along with means for meas-
                                uring it. Like force, a concept of temperature originates with our sense perceptions. It is
                                rooted in the notion of the "hotness" or "coldness" of a body. We use our sense of touch to
                                distinguish hot bodies from cold bodies and to arrange bodies in their order of "hotness," de-
                                ciding that 1 is hotter than 2, 2 hotter than 3, and so on. But however sensitive the human
                                body may be, we are unable to gauge this quality precisely. Accordingly, thermometers and
                                temperature scales have been devised to measure it.

thermal (heat)          1.6.1 Thermal Equilibrium
interaction
                       A definition of temperature in terms of concepts that are independently defined or accepted
thermal equilibrium    as primitive is difficult to give. However, it is possible to arrive at an objective understand-
temperature            ing of equality of temperature by using the fact that when the temperature of a body changes,
                       other properties also change.
adiabatic process
isothermal process        To illustrate this, consider two copper blocks, and suppose that our senses tell us that one
zeroth law of          is warmer than the other. If the blocks were brought into contact and isolated from their sur-
thermodynamics         roundings, they would interact in a way that can be described as a thermal (heat) interaction.
                       During this interaction, it would be observed that the volume of the warmer block decreases
                       somewhat with time, while the volume of the colder block increases with time. Eventually,
                       no further changes in volume would be observed, and the blocks would feel equally warm.
                       Similarly, we would be able to observe that the electrical resistance of the warmer block de-
                       creases with time, and that of the colder block increases with time; eventually the electrical
                       resistances would become constant also. When all changes in such observable properties cease,
                       the interaction is at an end. The two blocks are then in thermal equilibrium. Considerations
                       such as these lead us to infer that the blocks have a physical property that determines whether
                       they will be in thermal equilibrium. This property is called temperature, and we may postu-
                       late that when the two blocks are in thermal equilibrium, their temperatures are equal.

                          The rate at which the blocks approach thermal equilibrium with one another can be slowed
                       by separating them with a thick layer of polystyrene foam, rock wool, cork, or other insu-
                       lating material. Although the rate at which equilibrium is approached can be reduced, no ac-
                       tual material can prevent the blocks from interacting until they attain the same temperature.
                       However, by extrapolating from experience, an ideal insulator can be imagined that would
                       preclude them from interacting thermally. An ideal insulator is called an adiabatic wall. When
                       a system undergoes a process while enclosed by an adiabatic wall, it experiences no thermal
                       interaction with its surroundings. Such a process is called an adiabatic process. A process
                       that occurs at constant temperature is an isothermal process. An adiabatic process is not nec-
                       essarily an isothermal process, nor is an isothermal process necessarily adiabatic.

                          It is a matter of experience that when two bodies are in thermal equilibrium with a third
                       body, they are in thermal equilibrium with one another. This statement, which is sometimes
                       called the zeroth law of thermodynamics, is tacitly assumed in every measurement of tem-
                       perature. Thus, if we want to know if two bodies are at the same temperature, it is not nec-
                       essary to bring them into contact and see whether their observable properties change with
                       time, as described previously. It is necessary only to see if they are individually in thermal
                       equilibrium with a third body. The third body is usually a thermometer.

thermometric property   1.6.2 Thermometers

                       Any body with at least one measurable property that changes as its temperature changes can
                       be used as a thermometer. Such a property is called a thermometric property. The particular
                                                                                           1.6 Measuring Temperature 15

Thermodynamics in the News...

Mercury Thermometers                                                 The safe disposal of millions of
Quickly Vanishing                                                obsolete mercury-filled thermo-
                                                                 meters has emerged in its own
The mercury-in-glass fever thermometers, once found in           right as an environmental issue.
nearly every medicine cabinet, are a thing of the past. The      For proper disposal, thermometers
American Academy of Pediatrics has designated mercury as         must be taken to hazardous-waste
too toxic to be present in the home. Families are turning to     collection stations rather than sim-
safer alternatives and disposing of mercury thermometers.        ply thrown in the trash where they
Proper disposal is an issue, experts say.                        can be easily broken, releasing
                                                                 mercury. Loose fragments of bro-
    The present generation of liquid-in-glass fever thermome-    ken thermometers and anything
ters for home use contains patented liquid mixtures that are     that contacted its mercury should
nontoxic, safe alternatives to mercury. Battery-powered digital  be transported in closed containers
thermometers also are common today. These devices use the        to appropriate disposal sites.
fact that electrical resistance changes predictably with tem-
perature to safely check for a fever.

substance that exhibits changes in the thermometric property is known as a thermometric
substance.

   A familiar device for temperature measurement is the liquid-in-glass thermometer
pictured in Fig. 1.9a, which consists of a glass capillary tube connected to a bulb filled
with a liquid such as alcohol and sealed at the other end. The space above the liquid is
occupied by the vapor of the liquid or an inert gas. As temperature increases, the liquid
expands in volume and rises in the capillary. The length L of the liquid in the capillary
depends on the temperature. Accordingly, the liquid is the thermometric substance and L
is the thermometric property. Although this type of thermometer is commonly used for
ordinary temperature measurements, it is not well suited for applications where extreme
accuracy is required.

OTHER TEMPERATURE SENSORS

Sensors known as thermocouples are based on the principle that when two dissimilar met-
als are joined, an electromotive force (emf ) that is primarily a function of temperature will
exist in a circuit. In certain thermocouples, one thermocouple wire is platinum of a speci-
fied purity and the other is an alloy of platinum and rhodium. Thermocouples also utilize

L                                                                 Figure 1.9 Thermometers.

  Liquid                                                         (a) Liquid-in-glass. (b) Infrared-
         (a)
              (b)                                                sensing ear thermometer.
16 Chapter 1 Getting Started: Introductory Concepts and Definitions

Capillary                 Mercury
                       L  reservoir

 Gas bulb

Manometer

                                                                      Figure 1.10 Constant-volume gas
                                                                     thermometer.

copper and constantan (an alloy of copper and nickel), iron and constantan, as well as sev-
eral other pairs of materials. Electrical-resistance sensors are another important class of
temperature measurement devices. These sensors are based on the fact that the electrical
resistance of various materials changes in a predictable manner with temperature. The ma-
terials used for this purpose are normally conductors (such as platinum, nickel, or copper)
or semiconductors. Devices using conductors are known as resistance temperature detec-
tors. Semiconductor types are called thermistors. A variety of instruments measure tem-
perature by sensing radiation, such as the ear thermometer shown in Fig. 1.9(b). They are
known by terms such as radiation thermometers and optical pyrometers. This type of
thermometer differs from those previously considered in that it does not actually come in
contact with the body whose temperature is to be determined, an advantage when dealing
with moving objects or bodies at extremely high temperatures. All of these temperature
sensors can be used together with automatic data acquisition.

   The constant-volume gas thermometer shown in Fig. 1.10 is so exceptional in terms of pre-
cision and accuracy that it has been adopted internationally as the standard instrument for
calibrating other thermometers. The thermometric substance is the gas (normally hydrogen or
helium), and the thermometric property is the pressure exerted by the gas. As shown in the figure,
the gas is contained in a bulb, and the pressure exerted by it is measured by an open-tube mercury
manometer. As temperature increases, the gas expands, forcing mercury up in the open tube.
The gas is kept at constant volume by raising or lowering the reservoir. The gas thermometer is
used as a standard worldwide by bureaus of standards and research laboratories. However, because
gas thermometers require elaborate apparatus and are large, slowly responding devices that de-
mand painstaking experimental procedures, smaller, more rapidly responding thermometers are
used for most temperature measurements and they are calibrated (directly or indirectly) against
gas thermometers. For further discussion of gas thermometry, see box.

M E AS U R I N G T E M P E R AT U R E W I T H T H E G AS
THERMOMETER--THE GAS SCALE

It is instructive to consider how numerical values are associated with levels of tem-
perature by the gas thermometer shown in Fig. 1.10. Let p stand for the pressure in a
constant-volume gas thermometer in thermal equilibrium with a bath. A value can be
assigned to the bath temperature very simply by a linear relation

                                                                     T  ap                             (1.11)

where  is an arbitrary constant. The linear relationship is an arbitrary choice; other
selections for the correspondence between pressure and temperature could also be
made.
                        1.6 Measuring Temperature 17

                                                                                               Measured data for a

   The value of  may be determined by inserting the thermometer into another bath              fixed level of
maintained at a standard fixed point: the triple point of water (Sec. 3.2) and measuring
                                                                                               temperature, extrapolated
the pressure, call it ptp, of the confined gas at the triple point temperature, 273.16 K.
Substituting values into Eq. 1.16 and solving for                                              to zero pressure     O2

a    273.16                                                                                                                    N2
       ptp                                                                                     p­pt­p

The temperature of the original bath, at which the pressure of the confined gas is p, is then                                  He
                                                                                                                               H2

                                                                                                         T = 273.16 lim p­pt­p

                 p      (1.12)                                                                                   ptp
T  273.16 a b
                                                                                                Figure 1.11 Read-
                ptp                                                                            ings of constant-volume
                                                                                               gas thermometers, when
   However, since the values of both pressures, p and ptp, depend in part on the               several gases are used.
amount of gas in the bulb, the value assigned by Eq. 1.17 to the bath temperature

varies with the amount of gas in the thermometer. This difficulty is overcome in pre-

cision thermometry by repeating the measurements (in the original bath and the ref-

erence bath) several times with less gas in the bulb in each successive attempt. For
each trial the ratio pptp is calculated from Eq. 1.17 and plotted versus the corre-
sponding reference pressure ptp of the gas at the triple point temperature. When several
such points have been plotted, the resulting curve is extrapolated to the ordinate where
ptp  0. This is illustrated in Fig. 1.11 for constant-volume thermometers with a num-
ber of different gases.

   Inspection of Fig. 1.11 shows an important result. At each nonzero value of the ref-
erence pressure, the pptp values differ with the gas employed in the thermometer. How-
ever, as pressure decreases, the pptp values from thermometers with different gases
approach one another, and in the limit as pressure tends to zero, the same value for
pptp is obtained for each gas. Based on these general results, the gas temperature scale
is defined by the relationship

                    p   (1.13)
T  273.16 lim

                   ptp

where "lim" means that both p and ptp tend to zero. It should be evident that the de-
termination of temperatures by this means requires extraordinarily careful and elabo-
rate experimental procedures.

   Although the temperature scale of Eq. 1.18 is independent of the properties of any
one gas, it still depends on the properties of gases in general. Accordingly, the meas-
urement of low temperatures requires a gas that does not condense at these tempera-
tures, and this imposes a limit on the range of temperatures that can be measured by
a gas thermometer. The lowest temperature that can be measured with such an instru-
ment is about 1 K, obtained with helium. At high temperatures gases dissociate, and
therefore these temperatures also cannot be determined by a gas thermometer. Other
empirical means, utilizing the properties of other substances, must be employed to
measure temperature in ranges where the gas thermometer is inadequate. For further
discussion see Sec. 5.5.

 1.6.3 Kelvin Scale

Empirical means of measuring temperature such as considered in Sec. 1.6.2 have inherent
limitations.  for example. . . the tendency of the liquid in a liquid-in-glass thermometer
to freeze at low temperatures imposes a lower limit on the range of temperatures that can be
18 Chapter 1 Getting Started: Introductory Concepts and Definitions

                 measured. At high temperatures liquids vaporize, and therefore these temperatures also can-
                 not be determined by a liquid-in-glass thermometer. Accordingly, several different ther-
                 mometers might be required to cover a wide temperature interval. 

Kelvin scale        In view of the limitations of empirical means for measuring temperature, it is desirable
                 to have a procedure for assigning temperature values that does not depend on the proper-
                 ties of any particular substance or class of substances. Such a scale is called a thermodyn-
                 amic temperature scale. The Kelvin scale is an absolute thermodynamic temperature scale
                 that provides a continuous definition of temperature, valid over all ranges of temperature.
                 Empirical measures of temperature, with different thermometers, can be related to the
                 Kelvin scale.

                    To develop the Kelvin scale, it is necessary to use the conservation of energy principle
                 and the second law of thermodynamics; therefore, further discussion is deferred to Sec. 5.5
                 after these principles have been introduced. However, we note here that the Kelvin scale has
                 a zero of 0 K, and lower temperatures than this are not defined.

                    The Kelvin scale and the gas scale defined by Eq. 1.18 can be shown to be identical in
                 the temperature range in which a gas thermometer can be used. For this reason we may
                 write K after a temperature determined by means of constant-volume gas thermometry.
                 Moreover, until the concept of temperature is reconsidered in more detail in Chap. 5, we
                 assume that all temperatures referred to in the interim are in accord with values given by
                 a constant-volume gas thermometer.

triple point      1.6.4 Celsius Scale
Celsius scale
                 Temperature scales are defined by the numerical value assigned to a standard fixed point. By
                 international agreement the standard fixed point is the easily reproducible triple point of water:
                 the state of equilibrium between steam, ice, and liquid water (Sec. 3.2). As a matter of conven-
                 ience, the temperature at this standard fixed point is defined as 273.16 kelvins, abbreviated as
                 273.16 K. This makes the temperature interval from the ice point1 (273.15 K) to the steam point2
                 equal to 100 K and thus in agreement over the interval with the Celsius scale discussed next,
                 which assigns 100 Celsius degrees to it. The kelvin is the SI base unit for temperature.

                    The Celsius temperature scale (formerly called the centigrade scale) uses the unit degree
                 Celsius (C), which has the same magnitude as the kelvin. Thus, temperature differences are
                 identical on both scales. However, the zero point on the Celsius scale is shifted to 273.15 K,
                 as shown by the following relationship between the Celsius temperature and the Kelvin
                 temperature

                 T1°C2  T1K2  273.15                                 (1.14)

                 From this it can be seen that on the Celsius scale the triple point of water is 0.01C and that
                 0 K corresponds to 273.15C.

                 1.7 Engineering Design and Analysis

                 An important engineering function is to design and analyze things intended to meet human
                 needs. Design and analysis, together with systematic means for approaching them, are
                 considered in this section.

                 1The state of equilibrium between ice and air-saturated water at a pressure of 1 atm.
                 2The state of equilibrium between steam and liquid water at a pressure of 1 atm.
                                                 1.7 Engineering Design and Analysis 19

               K  °C
                  373.15
                                  100.0

Steam point

Triple point      273.15 273.16
    of water                      0.00 0.01

Ice point

               Kelvin
                        0.00

                               Celsius
                                        ­273.15

Absolute zero

                                                  Figure 1.12 Comparison of temperature scales.

 1.7.1 Design

Engineering design is a decision-making process in which principles drawn from engineer-                       design constraints
ing and other fields such as economics and statistics are applied, usually iteratively, to de-
vise a system, system component, or process. Fundamental elements of design include the
establishment of objectives, synthesis, analysis, construction, testing, and evaluation. Designs
typically are subject to a variety of constraints related to economics, safety, environmental
impact, and so on.

   Design projects usually originate from the recognition of a need or an opportunity that
is only partially understood. Thus, before seeking solutions it is important to define the
design objectives. Early steps in engineering design include pinning down quantitative per-
formance specifications and identifying alternative workable designs that meet the speci-
fications. Among the workable designs are generally one or more that are "best" accord-
ing to some criteria: lowest cost, highest efficiency, smallest size, lightest weight, etc. Other
important factors in the selection of a final design include reliability, manufacturability,
maintainability, and marketplace considerations. Accordingly, a compromise must be
sought among competing criteria, and there may be alternative design solutions that are
very similar.3

 1.7.2 Analysis

Design requires synthesis: selecting and putting together components to form a coordinated
whole. However, as each individual component can vary in size, performance, cost, and so
on, it is generally necessary to subject each to considerable study or analysis before a final
selection can be made.  for example. . . a proposed design for a fire-protection sys-
tem might entail an overhead piping network together with numerous sprinkler heads. Once
an overall configuration has been determined, detailed engineering analysis would be nec-
essary to specify the number and type of the spray heads, the piping material, and the pipe
diameters of the various branches of the network. The analysis must also aim to ensure that
all components form a smoothly working whole while meeting relevant cost constraints and
applicable codes and standards. 

3For further discussion, see A. Bejan, G. Tsatsaronis, and M. J. Moran, Thermal Design and Optimization, John
Wiley & Sons, New York, 1996, Chap. 1
20 Chapter 1 Getting Started: Introductory Concepts and Definitions

engineering model     Engineers frequently do analysis, whether explicitly as part of a design process or for
                   some other purpose. Analyses involving systems of the kind considered in this book use, di-
                   rectly or indirectly, one or more of three basic laws. These laws, which are independent of
                   the particular substance or substances under consideration, are

                    the conservation of mass principle

                    the conservation of energy principle

                    the second law of thermodynamics

                   In addition, relationships among the properties of the particular substance or substances
                   considered are usually necessary (Chaps. 3, 6, 11­14). Newton's second law of motion
                   (Chaps. 1, 2, 9), relations such as Fourier's conduction model (Chap. 2), and principles of
                   engineering economics (Chap. 7) may also play a part.

                      The first steps in a thermodynamic analysis are definition of the system and identification
                   of the relevant interactions with the surroundings. Attention then turns to the pertinent phys-
                   ical laws and relationships that allow the behavior of the system to be described in terms of
                   an engineering model. The objective in modeling is to obtain a simplified representation of
                   system behavior that is sufficiently faithful for the purpose of the analysis, even if many as-
                   pects exhibited by the actual system are ignored. For example, idealizations often used in
                   mechanics to simplify an analysis and arrive at a manageable model include the assumptions
                   of point masses, frictionless pulleys, and rigid beams. Satisfactory modeling takes experi-
                   ence and is a part of the art of engineering.

                      Engineering analysis is most effective when it is done systematically. This is considered next.

                    1.7.3 Methodology for Solving Thermodynamics Problems

                   A major goal of this textbook is to help you learn how to solve engineering problems that
                   involve thermodynamic principles. To this end numerous solved examples and end-of-chapter
                   problems are provided. It is extremely important for you to study the examples and solve
                   problems, for mastery of the fundamentals comes only through practice.

                      To maximize the results of your efforts, it is necessary to develop a systematic approach.
                   You must think carefully about your solutions and avoid the temptation of starting problems
                   in the middle by selecting some seemingly appropriate equation, substituting in numbers, and
                   quickly "punching up" a result on your calculator. Such a haphazard problem-solving
                   approach can lead to difficulties as problems become more complicated. Accordingly, we
                   strongly recommend that problem solutions be organized using the five steps in the box be-
                   low, which are employed in the solved examples of this text.

 Known: State briefly in your own words what is known. This requires that you read the problem carefully and think

     about it.

 Find: State concisely in your own words what is to be determined.
 Schematic and Given Data: Draw a sketch of the system to be considered. Decide whether a closed system or control vol-

     ume is appropriate for the analysis, and then carefully identify the boundary. Label the diagram with relevant information from
     the problem statement.

     Record all property values you are given or anticipate may be required for subsequent calculations. Sketch appropriate prop-
     erty diagrams (see Sec. 3.2), locating key state points and indicating, if possible, the processes executed by the system.

     The importance of good sketches of the system and property diagrams cannot be overemphasized. They are often instrumen-
     tal in enabling you to think clearly about the problem.
                                                                                                                 1.7 Engineering Design and Analysis 21

 Assumptions: To form a record of how you model the problem, list all simplifying assumptions and idealizations made to

     reduce it to one that is manageable. Sometimes this information also can be noted on the sketches of the previous step.

 Analysis: Using your assumptions and idealizations, reduce the appropriate governing equations and relationships to forms

     that will produce the desired results.

     It is advisable to work with equations as long as possible before substituting numerical data. When the equations are reduced
     to final forms, consider them to determine what additional data may be required. Identify the tables, charts, or property equa-
     tions that provide the required values. Additional property diagram sketches may be helpful at this point to clarify states and
     processes.

     When all equations and data are in hand, substitute numerical values into the equations. Carefully check that a consistent and
     appropriate set of units is being employed. Then perform the needed calculations.

     Finally, consider whether the magnitudes of the numerical values are reasonable and the algebraic signs associated with the
     numerical values are correct.

     The problem solution format used in this text is intended to guide your thinking, not sub-
 stitute for it. Accordingly, you are cautioned to avoid the rote application of these five steps,
 for this alone would provide few benefits. Indeed, as a particular solution evolves you may
 have to return to an earlier step and revise it in light of a better understanding of the problem.
 For example, it might be necessary to add or delete an assumption, revise a sketch, deter-
 mine additional property data, and so on.

     The solved examples provided in the book are frequently annotated with various com-
 ments intended to assist learning, including commenting on what was learned, identifying
 key aspects of the solution, and discussing how better results might be obtained by relaxing
 certain assumptions. Such comments are optional in your solutions.

     In some of the earlier examples and end-of-chapter problems, the solution format may
 seem unnecessary or unwieldy. However, as the problems become more complicated you will
 see that it reduces errors, saves time, and provides a deeper understanding of the problem
 at hand.

     The example to follow illustrates the use of this solution methodology together with im-
 portant concepts introduced previously.

     E X A M P L E 1 . 1 Identifying System Interactions

     A wind turbine­ electric generator is mounted atop a tower. As wind blows steadily across the turbine blades, electricity is
     generated. The electrical output of the generator is fed to a storage battery.
     (a) Considering only the wind turbine­electric generator as the system, identify locations on the system boundary where the
     system interacts with the surroundings. Describe changes occurring within the system with time.
     (b) Repeat for a system that includes only the storage battery.

     SOLUTION

     Known: A wind turbine­electric generator provides electricity to a storage battery.

     Find: For a system consisting of (a) the wind turbine­electric generator, (b) the storage battery, identify locations where the
     system interacts with its surroundings, and describe changes occurring within the system with time.
22 Chapter 1 Getting Started: Introductory Concepts and Definitions
   Schematic and Given Data:
                                   Part (a)

Air flow  Turbine­generator

          Electric           Part (b)                              Assumptions:
          current
          flow                                                     1. In part (a), the system is the control volume shown by
                                                                   the dashed line on the figure.
                                                                   2. In part (b), the system is the closed system shown by
                                                                   the dashed line on the figure.
                                                                   3. The wind is steady.

                    Storage  Thermal
                    battery  interaction

                                                                    Figure E1.1

     Analysis:

     (a) In this case, there is air flowing across the boundary of the control volume. Another principal interaction between the
     system and surroundings is the electric current passing through the wires. From the macroscopic perspective, such an interaction
     is not considered a mass transfer, however. With a steady wind, the turbine­generator is likely to reach steady-state operation,
     where the rotational speed of the blades is constant and a steady electric current is generated.

 (b) The principal interaction between the system and its surroundings is the electric current passing into the battery through

     the wires. As noted in part (a), this interaction is not considered a mass transfer. The system is a closed system. As the bat-
     tery is charged and chemical reactions occur within it, the temperature of the battery surface may become somewhat elevated
     and a thermal interaction might occur between the battery and its surroundings. This interaction is likely to be of secondary
     importance.

     Using terms familiar from a previous physics course, the system of part (a) involves the conversion of kinetic energy to

          electricity, whereas the system of part (b) involves energy storage within the battery.

Chapter Summary and Study Guide

In this chapter, we have introduced some of the fundamental        states as well as quasiequilibrium processes during which the
concepts and definitions used in the study of thermodynam-         departure from equilibrium is negligible.
ics. The principles of thermodynamics are applied by engi-
neers to analyze and design a wide variety of devices intended        In this chapter, we have introduced SI units for mass,
to meet human needs.                                               length, time, force, and temperature. You will need to be fa-
                                                                   miliar of units as you use this book.
   An important aspect of thermodynamic analysis is to iden-
tify systems and to describe system behavior in terms of prop-        Chapter 1 concludes with discussions of how thermody-
erties and processes. Three important properties discussed in      namics is used in engineering design and how to solve ther-
this chapter are specific volume, pressure, and temperature.       modynamics problems systematically.

   In thermodynamics, we consider systems at equilibrium              This book has several features that facilitate study and con-
states and systems undergoing changes of state. We study           tribute to understanding. For an overview, see How To Use
processes during which the intervening states are not equilibrium  This Book Effectively.
                                                                    Problems: Developing Engineering Skills 23

   The following checklist provides a study guide for this           work on a molar basis using Eq. 1.5.
chapter. When your study of the text and the end-of-chapter
exercises has been completed you should be able to                   identify an appropriate system boundary and describe the
                                                                       interactions between the system and its surroundings.
 write out the meanings of the terms listed in the margin
   throughout the chapter and understand each of the                 apply the methodology for problem solving discussed in
   related concepts. The subset of key concepts listed below           Sec. 1.7.3.
   is particularly important in subsequent chapters.

Key Engineering Concepts

surroundings p. 3    process p. 5                                   pure substance p. 6      isothermal
boundary p. 3        thermodynamic                                  equilibrium p. 7            process p. 14
closed system p. 3                                                  specific volume p. 10
control volume p. 3     cycle p. 5                                  pressure p. 11           Kelvin scale p. 18
property p. 5        extensive property p. 6                        temperature p. 14        Rankine scale p. ··
state p. 5           intensive property p. 6                        adiabatic process p. 14
                     phase p. 6

Exercises: Things Engineers Think About

1. For an everyday occurrence, such as cooking, heating or cool-    5. Air at normal temperature and pressure contained in a closed
ing a house, or operating an automobile or a computer, make a       tank adheres to the continuum hypothesis. Yet when sufficient air
sketch of what you observe. Define system boundaries for ana-       has been drawn from the tank, the hypothesis no longer applies
lyzing some aspect of the events taking place. Identify interac-    to the remaining air. Why?
tions between the systems and their surroundings.
                                                                    6. Can the value of an intensive property be uniform with posi-
2. What are possible boundaries for studying each of the            tion throughout a system? Be constant with time? Both?
following?
                                                                    7. A data sheet indicates that the pressure at the inlet to a pump
   (a) a bicycle tire inflating.                                    is 10 kPa. What might the negative pressure denote?
   (b) a cup of water being heated in a microwave oven.
   (c) a household refrigerator in operation.                       8. We commonly ignore the pressure variation with elevation for
   (d) a jet engine in flight.                                      a gas inside a storage tank. Why?
   (e) cooling a desktop computer.
   (f) a residential gas furnace in operation.                      9. When buildings have large exhaust fans, exterior doors can be
   (g) a rocket launching.                                          difficult to open due to a pressure difference between the inside
                                                                    and outside. Do you think you could open a 3- by 7-ft door if the
3. Considering a lawnmower driven by a one-cylinder gasoline        inside pressure were 1 in. of water (vacuum)?
engine as the system, would this be best analyzed as a closed sys-
tem or a control volume? What are some of the environmental         10. What difficulties might be encountered if water were used
impacts associated with the system? Repeat for an electrically      as the thermometric substance in the liquid-in-glass thermome-
driven lawnmower.                                                   ter of Fig. 1.9?

4. A closed system consists of still air at 1 atm, 20C in a closed  11. Look carefully around your home, automobile, or place of
vessel. Based on the macroscopic view, the system is in equilib-    employment, and list all the measuring devices you find. For each,
rium, yet the atoms and molecules that make up the air are in       try to explain the principle of operation.
continuous motion. Reconcile this apparent contradiction.

Problems: Developing Engineering Skills

Exploring System Concepts                                           1.2 As illustrated in Fig. P1.2, electric current from a storage
                                                                       battery runs an electric motor. The shaft of the motor is con-
1.1 Referring to Figs. 1.1 and 1.2, identify locations on the          nected to a pulley­mass assembly that raises a mass. Consid-
   boundary of each system where there are interactions with the       ering the motor as a system, identify locations on the system
   surroundings.
24 Chapter 1 Getting Started: Introductory Concepts and Definitions

boundary where the system interacts with its surroundings and              1.5 As illustrated in Fig. P1.5, water for a fire hose is drawn
describe changes that occur within the system with time. Re-                  from a pond by a gasoline engine ­ driven pump. Consider-
peat for an enlarged system that also includes the battery and                ing the engine-driven pump as a system, identify locations
pulley­mass assembly.                                                         on the system boundary where the system interacts with its
                                                                              surroundings and describe events occurring within the sys-
                                                                              tem. Repeat for an enlarged system that includes the hose and
                                                                              the nozzle.

Battery                           Motor

                                                                     Mass  Nozzle
                                                                                        Intake hose
           Figure P1.2

1.3 As illustrated in Fig. P1.3, water circulates between a stor-
   age tank and a solar collector. Heated water from the tank is
   used for domestic purposes. Considering the solar collector as
   a system, identify locations on the system boundary where the
   system interacts with its surroundings and describe events that
   occur within the system. Repeat for an enlarged system that
   includes the storage tank and the interconnecting piping.

                                                               Hot water
                                                               supply

                     Solar        Hot water                                                                     Pond
                     collector    storage                                   Figure P1.5
                                  tank

                     Circulating                  Cold water               1.6 A system consists of liquid water in equilibrium with a
                     pump                         return                      gaseous mixture of air and water vapor. How many phases
                                                                              are present? Does the system consist of a pure substance?
                                          +                                   Explain. Repeat for a system consisting of ice and liquid
                                          ­                                   water in equilibrium with a gaseous mixture of air and water
                                                                              vapor.
          Figure P1.3
                                                                           1.7 A system consists of liquid oxygen in equilibrium with oxy-
1.4 As illustrated in Fig. P1.4, steam flows through a valve and              gen vapor. How many phases are present? The system under-
   turbine in series. The turbine drives an electric generator. Con-          goes a process during which some of the liquid is vaporized.
   sidering the valve and turbine as a system, identify locations             Can the system be viewed as being a pure substance during
   on the system boundary where the system interacts with its                 the process? Explain.
   surroundings and describe events occurring within the system.
   Repeat for an enlarged system that includes the generator.              1.8 A system consisting of liquid water undergoes a process.
                                                                              At the end of the process, some of the liquid water has frozen,
Steam                             Turbine                            +        and the system contains liquid water and ice. Can the system
              Valve                               Generator                   be viewed as being a pure substance during the process?
                                                                              Explain.
                                                                     ­
                                                                           1.9 A dish of liquid water is placed on a table in a room. Af-
                                           Steam                              ter a while, all of the water evaporates. Taking the water and
                                                                              the air in the room to be a closed system, can the system be
 Figure P1.4                                                                  regarded as a pure substance during the process? After the
                                                                              process is completed? Discuss.
                                                                             Problems: Developing Engineering Skills 25

Working with Force and Mass                                           L=2m
                                                                                                        z
1.10 An object weighs 25 kN at a location where the acceler-
   ation of gravity is 9.8 m/s2. Determine its mass, in kg.                  D = 0.5 m

1.11 An object whose mass is 10 kg weighs 95 N. Determine                                                   Figure P1.20

   (a) the local acceleration of gravity, in m/s2.                    Using Specific Volume and Pressure
   (b) the mass, in kg, and the weight, in N, of the object at a
                                                                      1.21 Fifteen kg of carbon dioxide (CO2) gas is fed to a cylin-
        location where g  9.81 m/s2.                                     der having a volume of 20 m3 and initially containing 15 kg
                                                                         of CO2 at a pressure of 10 bar. Later a pinhole develops and
1.12 Atomic and molecular weights of some common sub-                    the gas slowly leaks from the cylinder.
   stances are listed in Appendix Table A-1. Using data from the
   appropriate table, determine the mass, in kg, of 10 kmol of           (a) Determine the specific volume, in m3/kg, of the CO2 in the
   each of the following: air, H2O, Cu, SO2.                                  cylinder initially. Repeat for the CO2 in the cylinder after
                                                                              the 15 kg has been added.
1.13 When an object of mass 5 kg is suspended from a spring,
   the spring is observed to stretch by 8 cm. The deflection of the      (b) Plot the amount of CO2 that has leaked from the cylinder,
   spring is related linearly to the weight of the suspended mass.            in kg, versus the specific volume of the CO2 remaining in
   What is the proportionality constant, in newton per cm, if g               the cylinder. Consider v ranging up to 1.0 m3/kg.
   9.81 m/s2?
                                                                      1.22 The following table lists temperatures and specific vol-
1.14 A simple instrument for measuring the acceleration of               umes of water vapor at two pressures:
   gravity employs a linear spring from which a mass is sus-
   pended. At a location on earth where the acceleration of grav-          p  1.0 MPa                           p  1.5 Mpa
   ity is 9.81 m/s2, the spring extends 0.739 cm. If the spring ex-
   tends 0.116 in. when the instrument is on Mars, what is the        T (C)  v (m3/kg)                     T (C)          v (m3/kg)
   Martian acceleration of gravity? How much would the spring
   extend on the moon, where g  1.67 m/s2?                            200               0.2060             200            0.1325

1.15 Estimate the magnitude of the force, in N, exerted by a          240               0.2275             240            0.1483
   seat belt on a 25 kg child during a frontal collision that decel-
   erates a car from 8 km/h to rest in 0.1 s. Express the car's de-   280               0.2480             280            0.1627
   celeration in multiples of the standard acceleration of gravity,
   or g's.                                                               Data encountered in solving problems often do not fall exactly
                                                                         on the grid of values provided by property tables, and linear
1.16 An object whose mass is 2 kg is subjected to an applied             interpolation between adjacent table entries becomes neces-
   upward force. The only other force acting on the object is the        sary. Using the data provided here, estimate
   force of gravity. The net acceleration of the object is upward
   with a magnitude of 5 m/s2. The acceleration of gravity is            (a) the specific volume at T  240C, p  1.25 MPa, in m3/kg.
   9.81 m/s2. Determine the magnitude of the applied upward              (b) the temperature at p  1.5 MPa, v  0.1555 m3/kg, in C.
   force, in N.                                                          (c) the specific volume at T  220C, p  1.4 MPa, in m3/kg.

1.17 A closed system consists of 0.5 kmol of liquid water and         1.23 A closed system consisting of 5 kg of a gas undergoes a
   occupies a volume of 4  103 m3. Determine the weight of               process during which the relationship between pressure and
   the system, in N, and the average density, in kg/m3, at a loca-       specific volume is pv1.3  constant. The process begins with
   tion where the acceleration of gravity is g  9.81 m/s2.               p1  1 bar, v1  0.2 m3/kg and ends with p2  0.25 bar. De-
                                                                         termine the final volume, in m3, and plot the process on a graph
1.18 The weight of an object on an orbiting space vehicle is             of pressure versus specific volume.
   measured to be 42 N based on an artificial gravitational ac-
   celeration of 6 m/s2. What is the weight of the object, in N, on
   earth, where g  9.81 m/s2?

1.19 If the variation of the acceleration of gravity, in m/s2, with
   elevation z, in m, above sea level is g  9.81  (3.3  106)z,
   determine the percent change in weight of an airliner landing
   from a cruising altitude of 10 km on a runway at sea level.

1.20 As shown in Fig. P1.21, a cylinder of compacted scrap
   metal measuring 2 m in length and 0.5 m in diameter is
   suspended from a spring scale at a location where the accel-
   eration of gravity is 9.78 m/s2. If the scrap metal density, in
   kg/m3, varies with position z, in m, according to   7800 
   360(zL)2, determine the reading of the scale, in N.
26 Chapter 1 Getting Started: Introductory Concepts and Definitions

1.24 A gas initially at p1  1 bar and occupying a volume of            1.29 Figure P1.29 shows a tank within a tank, each containing
   1 liter is compressed within a piston­cylinder assembly to a           air. Pressure gage A is located inside tank B and reads 1.4 bar.
   final pressure p2  4 bar.                                              The U-tube manometer connected to tank B contains mercury.
                                                                          Using data on the diagram, determine the absolute pressures
   (a) If the relationship between pressure and volume during the         inside tank A and tank B, each in bar. The atmospheric pres-
        compression is pV  constant, determine the volume, in             sure surrounding tank B is 101 kPa. The acceleration of grav-
        liters, at a pressure of 3 bar. Also plot the overall process     ity is g  9.81 m/s2.
        on a graph of pressure versus volume.
                                                                       Tank B                        patm = 101 kPa
   (b) Repeat for a linear pressure­volume relationship between
        the same end states.                                                                         L = 20 cm

1.25 A gas contained within a piston­cylinder assembly un-             Tank A
   dergoes a thermodynamic cycle consisting of three processes:                      Gage A

Process 1­2: Compression with pV  constant from p1  1 bar,                       pgage, A = 1.4 bar  Mercury (  = 13.59 g/cm3)
      V1  1.0 m3 to V2  0.2 m3                                          Figure P1.29                 g = 9.81 m/s2

Process 2­3: Constant-pressure expansion to V3  1.0 m3                 1.30 A vacuum gage indicates that the pressure of air in a closed
                                                                          chamber is 0.2 bar (vacuum). The pressure of the surrounding
Process 3­1: Constant volume                                              atmosphere is equivalent to a 750-mm column of mercury. The
                                                                          density of mercury is 13.59 g/cm3, and the acceleration of grav-
   Sketch the cycle on a p­V diagram labeled with pressure and            ity is 9.81 m/s2. Determine the absolute pressure within the
   volume values at each numbered state.                                  chamber, in bar.

1.26 As shown in Fig. 1.6, a manometer is attached to a tank           1.31 Refrigerant 22 vapor enters the compressor of a refrigera-
   of gas in which the pressure is 104.0 kPa. The manometer liq-          tion system at an absolute pressure of .1379 MPa.2 A pressure
   uid is mercury, with a density of 13.59 g/cm3. If g  9.81 m/s2         gage at the compressor exit indicates a pressure of 1.93 MPa.2
   and the atmospheric pressure is 101.33 kPa, calculate                  (gage). The atmospheric pressure is .1007 MPa.2 Determine
                                                                          the change in absolute pressure from inlet to exit, in MPa.2,
   (a) the difference in mercury levels in the manometer, in cm.          and the ratio of exit to inlet pressure.
   (b) the gage pressure of the gas, in kPa.
                                                                       1.32 Air contained within a vertical piston­cylinder assembly
1.27 The absolute pressure inside a tank is 0.4 bar, and the sur-         is shown in Fig. P1.32. On its top, the 10-kg piston is attached
   rounding atmospheric pressure is 98 kPa. What reading would            to a spring and exposed to an atmospheric pressure of 1 bar.
   a Bourdon gage mounted in the tank wall give, in kPa? Is this          Initially, the bottom of the piston is at x  0, and the spring
   a gage or vacuum reading?                                              exerts a negligible force on the piston. The valve is opened and
                                                                          air enters the cylinder from the supply line, causing the vol-
1.28 Water flows through a Venturi meter, as shown in Fig.                ume of the air within the cylinder to increase by 3.9  104 m3.
   P1.28. The pressure of the water in the pipe supports columns          The force exerted by the spring as the air expands within the
   of water that differ in height by 30 cm. Determine the dif-            cylinder varies linearly with x according to
   ference in pressure between points a and b, in MPa. Does
   the pressure increase or decrease in the direction of flow?                                         Fspring  kx
   The atmospheric pressure is 1 bar, the specific volume of water
   is 103 m3/kg, and the acceleration of gravity is g  9.81 m/s2.         where k  10,000 N/m. The piston face area is 7.8  103 m2.
                                                                          Ignoring friction between the piston and the cylinder wall,
   L = 30 cm.     patm = 1 bar                                            determine the pressure of the air within the cylinder, in bar,
                  g = 9.81 m/s2                                           when the piston is in its initial position. Repeat when the piston
                                                                          is in its final position. The local acceleration of gravity is
                  Water                                                   9.81 m/s2.
                   = 10-3 m3/kg

a              b

 Figure P1.28
                                                                                    Problems: Developing Engineering Skills 27

                      patm                                             1.37 Derive Eq. 1.10 and use it to determine the gage pressure,
                                                                          in bar, equivalent to a manometer reading of 1 cm of water (den-
                                     Air                                  sity  1000 kg/m3). Repeat for a reading of 1 cm of mercury.
                                     supply
                                     line                                 The density of mercury is 13.59 times that of water.

x=0                         Valve                                      Exploring Temperature
                 Air
                                                                       1.38 Two temperature measurements are taken with a ther-
            Figure P1.32                                                  mometer marked with the Celsius scale. Show that the
                                                                          difference between the two readings would be the same if the
1.33 Determine the total force, in kN, on the bottom of a                 temperatures were converted to the Kelvin scale.
   100  50 m swimming pool. The depth of the pool varies lin-
   early along its length from 1 m to 4 m. Also, determine the         1.39 The relation between resistance R and temperature T for
   pressure on the floor at the center of the pool, in kPa. The           a thermistor closely follows
   atmospheric pressure is 0.98 bar, the density of the water is
   998.2 kg/m3, and the local acceleration of gravity is 9.8 m/s2.                  R           R0  exp c b  a1    1 bd
                                                                                                              T    T0
1.34 Figure P1.34 illustrates an inclined manometer making an
   angle of  with the horizontal. What advantage does an in-           where R0 is the resistance, in ohms (), measured at temper-
   clined manometer have over a U-tube manometer? Explain.             ature T0 (K) and  is a material constant with units of K. For
                                                                       a particular thermistor R0  2.2  at T0  310 K. From a cal-
                                                                       ibration test, it is found that R  0.31  at T  422 K. De-
                                                                       termine the value of  for the thermistor and make a plot of

                                                                       resistance versus temperature.

                                                                       1.40 Over a limited temperature range, the relation between
                                                                          electrical resistance R and temperature T for a resistance tem-
                                                                          perature detector is

                                                                                            R  R0 3 1  a1T  T02 4

                                                                       where R0 is the resistance, in ohms (), measured at reference
                                                                       temperature T0 (in C) and  is a material constant with units
                                                                       of (C)1. The following data are obtained for a particular re-
                                                                       sistance thermometer:

 Figure P1.34                                                          Test 1 (T0)              T (C)              R ()
                                                                       Test 2
1.35 The variation of pressure within the biosphere affects not                                    0             (R0) 51.39
   only living things but also systems such as aircraft and under-                                91                  51.72
   sea exploration vehicles.
                                                                          What temperature would correspond to a resistance of 51.47 
   (a) Plot the variation of atmospheric pressure, in atm, versus         on this thermometer?
        elevation z above sea level, in km, ranging from 0 to 10 km.
        Assume that the specific volume of the atmosphere, in          1.41 A new absolute temperature scale is proposed. On this scale
        m3/kg, varies with the local pressure p, in kPa, according        the ice point of water is 150S and the steam point is 300S. De-
        to v  72.435p.                                                    termine the temperatures in C that correspond to 100 and 400S,
                                                                          respectively. What is the ratio of the size of the S to the kelvin?
   (b) Plot the variation of pressure, in atm, versus depth z be-
        low sea level, in km, ranging from 0 to 2 km. Assume that      1.42 As shown in Fig. P1.42, a small-diameter water pipe passes
        the specific volume of seawater is constant, v  0.956             through the 6-in.-thick exterior wall of a dwelling. Assuming
        103 m3/kg.                                                        that temperature varies linearly with position x through the wall
                                                                          from 20C to 6C, would the water in the pipe freeze?
   In each case, g  9.81 m/s2 and the pressure at sea level is
   1 atm.                                                              T = 20°C                              T = 6°C
                                                                                                Pipe
1.36 One thousand kg of natural gas at 100 bar and 255 K is
   stored in a tank. If the pressure, p, specific volume, v, and tem-               3 in.
   perature, T, of the gas are related by the following expression                       6 in.

  p  3 15.18  1032T1v  0.0026682 4  18.91  1032v2                                    x

   where v is in m3/kg, T is in K, and p is in bar, determine the                                                      Figure P1.42
   volume of the tank in m3. Also, plot pressure versus specific
   volume for the isotherms T  250 K, 500 K, and 1000 K.
28 Chapter 1 Getting Started: Introductory Concepts and Definitions

Design & Open Ended Problems: Exploring Engineering Practice

1.1D The issue of global warming is receiving considerable at-        1.7D Obtain manufacturers' data on thermocouple and ther-
   tention these days. Write a technical report on the subject of        mistor temperature sensors for measuring temperatures of hot
   global warming. Explain what is meant by the term global              combustion gases from a furnace. Explain the basic operating
   warming and discuss objectively the scientific evidence that is       principles of each sensor and compare the advantages and
   cited as the basis for the argument that global warming is            disadvantages of each device. Consider sensitivity, accuracy,
   occurring.                                                            calibration, and cost.

1.2D Economists and others speak of sustainable development           1.8D The International Temperature Scale was first adopted by
   as a means for meeting present human needs without com-               the International Committee on Weights and Measures in 1927
   promising the ability of future generations to meet their own         to provide a global standard for temperature measurement. This
   needs. Research the concept of sustainable development, and           scale has been refined and extended in several revisions, most
   write a paper objectively discussing some of the principal            recently in 1990 (International Temperature Scale of 1990,
   issues associated with it.                                            ITS-90). What are some of the reasons for revising the scale?
                                                                         What are some of the principal changes that have been made
1.3D Write a report reviewing the principles and objectives of           since 1927?
   statistical thermodynamics. How does the macroscopic ap-
   proach to thermodynamics of the present text differ from this?     1.9D A facility is under development for testing valves used in
   Explain.                                                              nuclear power plants. The pressures and temperatures of flow-
                                                                         ing gases and liquids must be accurately measured as part of
1.4D Methane-laden gas generated by the decomposition of                 the test procedure. The American National Standards Institute
   landfill trash is more commonly flared than exploited for some        (ANSI) and the American Society of Heating, Refrigerating,
   useful purpose. Research literature on the possible uses of land-     and Air Conditioning Engineers (ASHRAE) have adopted stan-
   fill gas and write a report of your findings. Does the gas rep-       dards for pressure and temperature measurement. Obtain copies
   resent a significant untapped resource? Discuss.                      of the relevant standards, and prepare a memorandum discussing
                                                                         what standards must be met in the design of the facility and
1.5D You are asked to address a city council hearing concern-            what requirements those standards place on the design.
   ing the decision to purchase a commercially available 10-kW
   wind turbine­generator having an expected life of 12 or more       1.10D List several aspects of engineering economics relevant
   years. As an engineer, what considerations will you point out         to design. What are the important contributors to cost that
   to the council members to help them with their decision?              should be considered in engineering design? Discuss what is
                                                                         meant by annualized costs.
1.6D Develop a schematic diagram of an automatic data acqui-
   sition system for sampling pressure data inside the cylinder of    1.11D Mercury Thermometers Quickly Vanishing (see box
   a diesel engine. Determine a suitable type of pressure transd-        Sec. 1.6). Investigate the medical complications of mercury ex-
   ucer for this purpose. Investigate appropriate computer software      posure. Write a report including at least three references.
   for running the system. Write a report of your findings.
Energy and the  C
First Law of    H
Thermodynamics  A
                P
                T

                2 E

                R

E N G I N E E R I N G C O N T E X T Energy is a fundamental concept of                           chapter objective
thermodynamics and one of the most significant aspects of engineering analysis. In
this chapter we discuss energy and develop equations for applying the principle of
conservation of energy. The current presentation is limited to closed systems. In Chap. 4
the discussion is extended to control volumes.

   Energy is a familiar notion, and you already know a great deal about it. In the present
chapter several important aspects of the energy concept are developed. Some of these
you have encountered before. A basic idea is that energy can be stored within systems in
various forms. Energy also can be converted from one form to another and transferred
between systems. For closed systems, energy can be transferred by work and heat
transfer. The total amount of energy is conserved in all conversions and transfers.

   The objective of this chapter is to organize these ideas about energy into forms
suitable for engineering analysis. The presentation begins with a review of energy
concepts from mechanics. The thermodynamic concept of energy is then introduced as
an extension of the concept of energy in mechanics.

2.1 Reviewing Mechanical
         Concepts of Energy

Building on the contributions of Galileo and others, Newton formulated a general descrip-
tion of the motions of objects under the influence of applied forces. Newton's laws of motion,
which provide the basis for classical mechanics, led to the concepts of work, kinetic energy,
and potential energy, and these led eventually to a broadened concept of energy. The present
discussion begins with an application of Newton's second law of motion.

WORK AND KINETIC ENERGY

The curved line in Fig. 2.1 represents the path of a body of mass m (a closed system) mov-
ing relative to the x­y coordinate frame shown. The velocity of the center of mass of the
body is denoted by V.1 The body is acted on by a resultant force F, which may vary in
magnitude from location to location along the path. The resultant force is resolved into a
component Fs along the path and a component Fn normal to the path. The effect of the

1Boldface symbols denote vectors. Vector magnitudes are shown in lightface type.

                                                                                                                                                                       29
30 Chapter 2 Energy and the First Law of Thermodynamics

                  y                  Fs

                             V                                     Path
                        ds                                     F

                     s  Body

                     0          Fn

                                                                            Figure 2.1 Forces acting on a moving
                                                                      x system.

                  component Fs is to change the magnitude of the velocity, whereas the effect of the compo-
                  nent Fn is to change the direction of the velocity. As shown in Fig. 2.1, s is the instantaneous
                  position of the body measured along the path from some fixed point denoted by 0. Since the

                  magnitude of F can vary from location to location along the path, the magnitudes of Fs and
                  Fn are, in general, functions of s.

                     Let us consider the body as it moves from s  s1, where the magnitude of its velocity is V1,
                  to s  s2, where its velocity is V2. Assume for the present discussion that the only interaction
                  between the body and its surroundings involves the force F. By Newton's second law of motion,

                  the magnitude of the component Fs is related to the change in the magnitude of V by

                                                                  Fs       dV                                     (2.1)
                                                                         m

                                                                            dt

                  Using the chain rule, this can be written as

                                                                  dV ds                 dV
                                                         Fs  m ds             mV                                  (2.2)
                                                                         dt                ds

                  where V  dsdt. Rearranging Eq. 2.2 and integrating from s1 to s2 gives

                                                           V2                    s2

                                                               mV d V  Fs ds                                      (2.3)

                                                           V1                    s1

                     The integral on the left of Eq. 2.3 is evaluated as follows

                                 V2  mV                  dV       1 mV2 d V2         1  m  1  V22    V212         (2.4)
                                 V1                               2                  2
                                                                             V1

kinetic energy    The quantity 12mV2 is the kinetic energy, KE, of the body. Kinetic energy is a scalar quan-
work              tity. The change in kinetic energy, KE, of the body is2

                                    ˘KE                    KE2        KE1        1   m  1  V22     V122           (2.5)
                                                                                 2

                  The integral on the right of Eq. 2.3 is the work of the force Fs as the body moves from s1 to
                  s2 along the path. Work is also a scalar quantity.

                     With Eq. 2.4, Eq. 2.3 becomes

                                                          1m1V22      V212        s2                              (2.6)

                                                         2                         F # ds

                                                                                 s1

                  2The symbol  always means "final value minus initial value."
                                                                 2.1 Reviewing Mechanical Concepts of Energy 31

Thermodynamics in the News...

Hybrids Harvest Energy                                           stored energy assists
                                                                 the engine, these cars
Ever wonder what happens to the kinetic energy when you          get better fuel econ-
step on the brakes of your moving car? Automotive engineers      omy than comparably
have, and the result is the hybrid electric vehicle combining    sized conventional
an electric motor with a small conventional engine.              vehicles.

    When a hybrid is braked, some of its kinetic energy is har-      To further reduce fuel consumption, hybrids are designed
vested and stored in batteries. The electric motor calls on the  with minimal aerodynamic drag, and many parts are made
stored energy to help the car start up again. A specially de-    from sturdy, lightweight materials such as carbon fiber-metal
signed transmission provides the proper split between the en-    composites. Some models now on the market achieve gas
gine and the electric motor to minimize fuel use. Because        mileage as high as 60­70 miles per gallon, manufacturers say.

where the expression for work has been written in terms of the scalar product (dot product)
of the force vector F and the displacement vector ds. Equation 2.6 states that the work of the
resultant force on the body equals the change in its kinetic energy. When the body is accel-
erated by the resultant force, the work done on the body can be considered a transfer of
energy to the body, where it is stored as kinetic energy.

   Kinetic energy can be assigned a value knowing only the mass of the body and the mag-
nitude of its instantaneous velocity relative to a specified coordinate frame, without regard
for how this velocity was attained. Hence, kinetic energy is a property of the body. Since
kinetic energy is associated with the body as a whole, it is an extensive property.

UNITS. Work has units of force times distance. The units of kinetic energy are the same as
for work. In SI, the energy unit is the newton-meter, N # m, called the joule, J. In this book
it is convenient to use the kilojoule, kJ.

POTENTIAL ENERGY

Equation 2.6 is the principal result of the previous section. Derived from Newton's second           R
law, the equation gives a relationship between two defined concepts: kinetic energy and work.                       z2
In this section it is used as a point of departure to extend the concept of energy. To begin,
refer to Fig. 2.2, which shows a body of mass m that moves vertically from an elevation z1        z  mg               z1
to an elevation z2 relative to the surface of the earth. Two forces are shown acting on the sys-
tem: a downward force due to gravity with magnitude mg and a vertical force with magni-              Earth's surface
tude R representing the resultant of all other forces acting on the system.
                                                                                                   Figure 2.2 Illustra-
   The work of each force acting on the body shown in Fig. 2.2 can be determined by               tion used to introduce the
using the definition previously given. The total work is the algebraic sum of these indi-         potential energy concept.
vidual values. In accordance with Eq. 2.6, the total work equals the change in kinetic
energy. That is

                                          z2       z2

                                           R dz     mg dz

                                         z1       z1
                  m  11 V22      V212                            (2.7)

                  2

A minus sign is introduced before the second term on the right because the gravitational
force is directed downward and z is taken as positive upward.

   The first integral on the right of Eq. 2.7 represents the work done by the force R on the
body as it moves vertically from z1 to z2. The second integral can be evaluated as follows

                              z2                                 (2.8)
                                 mg dz  mg 1z2  z12
                             z1
32 Chapter 2 Energy and the First Law of Thermodynamics

                           where the acceleration of gravity has been assumed to be constant with elevation. By incor-
                           porating Eq. 2.8 into Eq. 2.7 and rearranging

                                       1       1V22            V212                                        z2

                                      2                                                                     R dz
                                         m                               mg 1z2           z12                                           (2.9)
                                                                                                          z1

gravitational potential    The quantity mgz is the gravitational potential energy, PE. The change in gravitational
energy                     potential energy, PE, is

                                             ˘PE  PE2  PE1  mg 1z2  z12                                                                 (2.10)

                           The units for potential energy in any system of units are the same as those for kinetic en-
                           ergy and work.

                              Potential energy is associated with the force of gravity and is therefore an attribute of a
                           system consisting of the body and the earth together. However, evaluating the force of grav-
                           ity as mg enables the gravitational potential energy to be determined for a specified value of
                           g knowing only the mass of the body and its elevation. With this view, potential energy is
                           regarded as an extensive property of the body. Throughout this book it is assumed that ele-
                           vation differences are small enough that the gravitational force can be considered constant.
                           The concept of gravitational potential energy can be formulated to account for the variation
                           of the gravitational force with elevation, however.

                              To assign a value to the kinetic energy or the potential energy of a system, it is necessary
                           to assume a datum and specify a value for the quantity at the datum. Values of kinetic and
                           potential energy are then determined relative to this arbitrary choice of datum and reference
                           value. However, since only changes in kinetic and potential energy between two states are
                           required, these arbitrary reference specifications cancel.

                              When a system undergoes a process where there are changes in kinetic and potential en-
                           ergy, special care is required to obtain a consistent set of units.

                               for example. . . to illustrate the proper use of units in the calculation of such terms,

                           consider a system having a mass of 1 kg whose velocity increases from 15 m/s to 30 m/s
                           while its elevation decreases by 10 m at a location where g  9.7 m/s2. Then

                           ˘KE    1  m   1V22            V122
                                  2

                                  1  11  kg2   c  a30        m      2    a15      m    2  d  `       1    N        `  `     1 kJ     `
                                                                                                   kg     #m             103 N #
                                  2                            s  b               s  b          1             /s2                 m

                                 0.34 kJ

                           ˘PE  mg 1z2  z12

                                  11  kg  2  a9.7        m   b  110      m  2  `  1    1  N     /  s2  `  `     1 kJ     m  `
                                                         s2                          kg   #m                 103 N #

                                 0.10 kJ

                           CONSERVATION OF ENERGY IN MECHANICS

                           Equation 2.9 states that the total work of all forces acting on the body from the surround-
                           ings, with the exception of the gravitational force, equals the sum of the changes in the kinetic
                           and potential energies of the body. When the resultant force causes the elevation to be
                           increased, the body to be accelerated, or both, the work done by the force can be considered
                                             2.2 Broadening Our Understanding of Work 33

a transfer of energy to the body, where it is stored as gravitational potential energy and/or
kinetic energy. The notion that energy is conserved underlies this interpretation.

   The interpretation of Eq. 2.9 as an expression of the conservation of energy principle can
be reinforced by considering the special case of a body on which the only force acting is that
due to gravity, for then the right side of the equation vanishes and the equation reduces to

    1  m 1V22    V122    mg 1z2    z12    0
    2

or                                           (2.11) z                                                                    mg

    1  mV22      mgz2    1  mV12    mgz1
    2                    2

Under these conditions, the sum of the kinetic and gravitational potential energies remains
constant. Equation 2.11 also illustrates that energy can be converted from one form to an-
other: For an object falling under the influence of gravity only, the potential energy would
decrease as the kinetic energy increases by an equal amount.

CLOSURE

The presentation thus far has centered on systems for which applied forces affect only their
overall velocity and position. However, systems of engineering interest normally interact with
their surroundings in more complicated ways, with changes in other properties as well. To
analyze such systems, the concepts of kinetic and potential energy alone do not suffice, nor
does the rudimentary conservation of energy principle introduced in this section. In thermo-
dynamics the concept of energy is broadened to account for other observed changes, and the
principle of conservation of energy is extended to include a wide variety of ways in which
systems interact with their surroundings. The basis for such generalizations is experimental
evidence. These extensions of the concept of energy are developed in the remainder of the
chapter, beginning in the next section with a fuller discussion of work.

2.2 Broadening Our Understanding of Work

The work W done by, or on, a system evaluated in terms of macroscopically observable forces
and displacements is

                   s2                        (2.12) 

               W  F # ds

                            s1

This relationship is important in thermodynamics, and is used later in the present section to        thermodynamic
evaluate the work done in the compression or expansion of gas (or liquid), the extension of          definition of work
a solid bar, and the stretching of a liquid film. However, thermodynamics also deals with
phenomena not included within the scope of mechanics, so it is necessary to adopt a broader
interpretation of work, as follows.

   A particular interaction is categorized as a work interaction if it satisfies the following cri-
terion, which can be considered the thermodynamic definition of work: Work is done by a
system on its surroundings if the sole effect on everything external to the system could have
been the raising of a weight. Notice that the raising of a weight is, in effect, a force acting
through a distance, so the concept of work in thermodynamics is a natural extension of the
34 Chapter 2 Energy and the First Law of Thermodynamics

                              Paddle  System A
                              wheel
                                                            i
                          Gas
                                                                        System B

                                                         a           b

                                                            Battery

                                                                                   Figure 2.3 Two examples of
                                                                                  work.

                          concept of work in mechanics. However, the test of whether a work interaction has taken
                          place is not that the elevation of a weight has actually taken place, or that a force has actu-
                          ally acted through a distance, but that the sole effect could have been an increase in the
                          elevation of a weight.

                              for example. . . consider Fig. 2.3 showing two systems labeled A and B. In
                          system A, a gas is stirred by a paddle wheel: the paddle wheel does work on the gas. In
                          principle, the work could be evaluated in terms of the forces and motions at the boundary
                          between the paddle wheel and the gas. Such an evaluation of work is consistent with Eq. 2.12,
                          where work is the product of force and displacement. By contrast, consider system B, which
                          includes only the battery. At the boundary of system B, forces and motions are not evident.
                          Rather, there is an electric current i driven by an electrical potential difference existing
                          across the terminals a and b. That this type of interaction at the boundary can be classified
                          as work follows from the thermodynamic definition of work given previously: We can
                          imagine the current is supplied to a hypothetical electric motor that lifts a weight in the
                          surroundings. 

                             Work is a means for transferring energy. Accordingly, the term work does not refer to
                          what is being transferred between systems or to what is stored within systems. Energy is
                          transferred and stored when work is done.

sign convention for work   2.2.1 Sign Convention and Notation

                          Engineering thermodynamics is frequently concerned with devices such as internal combus-
                          tion engines and turbines whose purpose is to do work. Hence, in contrast to the approach
                          generally taken in mechanics, it is often convenient to consider such work as positive. That
                          is,

                                                              W 7 0: work done by the system

                                                             W 6 0: work done on the system

                          This sign convention is used throughout the book. In certain instances, however, it is con-
                          venient to regard the work done on the system to be positive, as has been done in the dis-
                          cussion of Sec. 2.1. To reduce the possibility of misunderstanding in any such case, the
                          direction of energy transfer is shown by an arrow on a sketch of the system, and work is re-
                          garded as positive in the direction of the arrow.

                             To evaluate the integral in Eq. 2.12, it is necessary to know how the force varies with the
                          displacement. This brings out an important idea about work: The value of W depends on the
                          details of the interactions taking place between the system and surroundings during a process
                                 2.2 Broadening Our Understanding of Work 35

and not just the initial and final states of the system. It follows that work is not a property   work is not a property
of the system or the surroundings. In addition, the limits on the integral of Eq. 2.12 mean
"from state 1 to state 2" and cannot be interpreted as the values of work at these states. The
notion of work at a state has no meaning, so the value of this integral should never be indi-
cated as W2  W1.

   The differential of work, W, is said to be inexact because, in general, the following in-
tegral cannot be evaluated without specifying the details of the process

                                                                              2

                         dW  W
                                                                             1

On the other hand, the differential of a property is said to be exact because the change in
a property between two particular states depends in no way on the details of the process
linking the two states. For example, the change in volume between two states can be de-
termined by integrating the differential dV, without regard for the details of the process,
as follows

                       V2
                                                  dV  V2  V1

                                                                       V1

where V1 is the volume at state 1 and V2 is the volume at state 2. The differential of every
property is exact. Exact differentials are written, as above, using the symbol d. To stress the
difference between exact and inexact differentials, the differential of work is written as W.
The symbol  is also used to identify other inexact differentials encountered later.

 2.2.2 Power

Many thermodynamic analyses are concerned with the time rate at which energ#y transfer            power
occurs. The rate of energy transfer by work is called power and is denoted by W. When a
work interaction involves a macroscopically observable force, the rate of energy transfer
by work is equal to the product of the force and the velocity at the point of application of
the force

                   #             (2.13) 
                  WF#V

                                               #
A dot appearing over a symbol, as in W, is used throughout this book to indicate a time rate.

In principle, Eq. 2.13 can be integrated from time t1 to time t2 to get the total work done dur-
ing the time interval

                t2 #  t2

              W  W dt  F # V dt  (2.14)

              t1    t1

                                                #
The same sign convention applies for W as for W. Since power is a time rate of doing work,

it can be expressed in terms of any units for energy and time. In SI, the unit for power is J/s,

called the watt. In this book the kilowatt, kW, is generally used.

    for example. . . to illustrate the use of Eq. 2.13, let us evaluate the power required
for a bicyclist traveling at 8.94 m/s to overcome the drag force imposed by the surrounding
air. This aerodynamic drag force is given by

                                               Fd  12CdArV2
36 Chapter 2 Energy and the First Law of Thermodynamics

  where Cd is a constant called the drag coefficient, A is the frontal area of the bicycle and
  rider, and  is the air density. By Eq. 2.13 the required power is Fd # V or

                                                #
                                               W  121CdArV22 V

                                                   21CdArV3

  Using typical values: Cd  0.88, A  0.362 m2, and   1.2 kg/m3, together with V  8.94 m/s,
  the power required is

          #    1  10.882                                     10.362  m22 11.2  kg/m32 18.94  m/s2 3
         W
               2

              136.6 W 

   2.2.3 Modeling Expansion or Compression Work

  There are many ways in which work can be done by or on a system. The remainder of this
  section is devoted to considering several examples, beginning with the important case of the
  work done when the volume of a quantity of a gas (or liquid) changes by expansion or
  compression.

     Let us evaluate the work done by the closed system shown in Fig. 2.4 consisting of a gas
  (or liquid) contained in a piston­cylinder assembly as the gas expands. During the process
  the gas pressure exerts a normal force on the piston. Let p denote the pressure acting at the
  interface between the gas and the piston. The force exerted by the gas on the piston is sim-
  ply the product pA, where A is the area of the piston face. The work done by the system as
  the piston is displaced a distance dx is

                                                             dW  pA dx                                          (2.15)

     The product A dx in Eq. 2.15 equals the change in volume of the system, dV. Thus, the
  work expression can be written as

                                                             dW  p dV                                           (2.16)

  Since dV is positive when volume increases, the work at the moving boundary is positive
  when the gas expands. For a compression, dV is negative, and so is work found from Eq. 2.16.
  These signs are in agreement with the previously stated sign convention for work.

     For a change in volume from V1 to V2, the work is obtained by integrating Eq. 2.16

                                                                 V2                                             (2.17)

                                                             W  p dV
                                                                     V1

  Although Eq. 2.17 is derived for the case of a gas (or liquid) in a piston­cylinder assembly,
  it is applicable to systems of any shape provided the pressure is uniform with position over
  the moving boundary.

         System boundary
         Area = A Average pressure at

                       the piston face = p

      F = pA
     Gas or
     liquid

  x  x1                                                  x2                     Figure 2.4 Expansion or
                                                                               compression of a gas or liquid.
2.2 Broadening Our Understanding of Work 37

ACTUAL EXPANSION OR COMPRESSION PROCESSES                                                           p  Measured data

To perform the integral of Eq. 2.17 requires a relationship between the gas pressure at the            Curve fit
moving boundary and the system volume, but this relationship may be difficult, or even
impossible, to obtain for actual compressions and expansions. In the cylinder of an auto-                                             V
mobile engine, for example, combustion and other nonequilibrium effects give rise to                 Figure 2.5 Pressure­
nonuniformities throughout the cylinder. Accordingly, if a pressure transducer were                 volume data.
mounted on the cylinder head, the recorded output might provide only an approximation
for the pressure at the piston face required by Eq. 2.17. Moreover, even when the measured
pressure is essentially equal to that at the piston face, scatter might exist in the pressure­
volume data, as illustrated in Fig. 2.5. Still, performing the integral of Eq. 2.17 based on
a curve fitted to the data could give a plausible estimate of the work. We will see later that
in some cases where lack of the required pressure­volume relationship keeps us from eval-
uating the work from Eq. 2.17, the work can be determined alternatively from an energy
balance (Sec. 2.5).

QUASIEQUILIBRIUM EXPANSION OR COMPRESSION PROCESSES

An idealized type of process called a quasiequilibrium process is introduced in Sec. 1.3. A         quasiequilibrium process
quasiequilibrium process is one in which all states through which the system passes may be
considered equilibrium states. A particularly important aspect of the quasiequilibrium process      Incremental masses removed
concept is that the values of the intensive properties are uniform throughout the system, or        during an expansion of the
every phase present in the system, at each state visited.                                           gas or liquid

   To consider how a gas (or liquid) might be expanded or compressed in a quasiequilib-                         Gas or
rium fashion, refer to Fig. 2.6, which shows a system consisting of a gas initially at an                        liquid
equilibrium state. As shown in the figure, the gas pressure is maintained uniform through-
out by a number of small masses resting on the freely moving piston. Imagine that one of                                   Boundary
the masses is removed, allowing the piston to move upward as the gas expands slightly.               Figure 2.6 Illustra-
During such an expansion the state of the gas would depart only slightly from equilibrium.          tion of a quasiequilibrium
The system would eventually come to a new equilibrium state, where the pressure and all             expansion or compression.
other intensive properties would again be uniform in value. Moreover, were the mass re-
placed, the gas would be restored to its initial state, while again the departure from equi-
librium would be slight. If several of the masses were removed one after another, the gas
would pass through a sequence of equilibrium states without ever being far from equilib-
rium. In the limit as the increments of mass are made vanishingly small, the gas would
undergo a quasiequilibrium expansion process. A quasiequilibrium compression can be
visualized with similar considerations.

   Equation 2.17 can be applied to evaluate the work in quasiequilibrium expansion or com-
pression processes. For such idealized processes the pressure p in the equation is the pressure
of the entire quantity of gas (or liquid) undergoing the process, and not just the pressure at
the moving boundary. The relationship between the pressure and volume may be graphical
or analytical. Let us first consider a graphical relationship.

   A graphical relationship is shown in the pressure­volume diagram ( p­V diagram) of
Fig. 2.7. Initially, the piston face is at position x1, and the gas pressure is p1; at the conclu-
sion of a quasiequilibrium expansion process the piston face is at position x2, and the pres-
sure is reduced to p2. At each intervening piston position, the uniform pressure throughout
the gas is shown as a point on the diagram. The curve, or path, connecting states 1 and 2 on
the diagram represents the equilibrium states through which the system has passed during
the process. The work done by the gas on the piston during the expansion is given by  p dV,
which can be interpreted as the area under the curve of pressure versus volume. Thus, the
shaded area on Fig. 2.7 is equal to the work for the process. Had the gas been compressed
from 2 to 1 along the same path on the p­V diagram, the magnitude of the work would be
38 Chapter 2 Energy and the First Law of Thermodynamics

                                               p1          1

                                                               Path

                                                                      W = p dV

                                     Pressure

                                               p2                                 2
                                                                                  Area =
                                                           V1           dV
                                                                     Volume       12 p dV

                                                                                V2

                                                   Gas or
                                                   liquid

                                                           x1                   x2          Figure 2.7 Work of a quasiequilibrium

                                                   x                                       expansion or compression process.

p                                    the same, but the sign would be negative, indicating that for the compression the energy trans-
   1                                 fer was from the piston to the gas.

      AB                                The area interpretation of work in a quasiequilibrium expansion or compression process
                                     allows a simple demonstration of the idea that work depends on the process. This can be
      Area = work    2               brought out by referring to Fig. 2.8. Suppose the gas in a piston­cylinder assembly goes from
                                     an initial equilibrium state 1 to a final equilibrium state 2 along two different paths, labeled
      for process A                  A and B on Fig. 2.8. Since the area beneath each path represents the work for that process,
                                     the work depends on the details of the process as defined by the particular curve and not just
                                  V  on the end states. Using the test for a property given in Sec. 1.3, we can conclude again
                                     (Sec. 2.2.1) that work is not a property. The value of work depends on the nature of the
 Figure 2.8 Illustra-                process between the end states.
tion that work depends on
the process.                            The relationship between pressure and volume during an expansion or compression process
                                     also can be described analytically. An example is provided by the expression pVn  constant,
polytropic process                   where the value of n is a constant for the particular process. A quasiequilibrium process de-
                                     scribed by such an expression is called a polytropic process. Additional analytical forms for
                                     the pressure­volume relationship also may be considered.

                                        The example to follow illustrates the application of Eq. 2.17 when the relationship between
                                     pressure and volume during an expansion is described analytically as pVn  constant.

      E X A M P L E 2 . 1 Evaluating Expansion Work

      A gas in a piston­cylinder assembly undergoes an expansion process for which the relationship between pressure and volume
      is given by

                                                                         pV n  constant
      The initial pressure is 3 bar, the initial volume is 0.1 m3, and the final volume is 0.2 m3. Determine the work for the process,
      in kJ, if (a) n  1.5, (b) n  1.0, and (c) n  0.
                                                                                                    2.2 Broadening Our Understanding of Work 39

  SOLUTION
  Known: A gas in a piston­cylinder assembly undergoes an expansion for which pV n  constant.
  Find: Evaluate the work if (a) n  1.5, (b) n  1.0, (c) n  0.
  Schematic and Given Data: The given p­V relationship and the given data for pressure and volume can be used to construct
  the accompanying pressure­volume diagram of the process.

             3.0               1                           2c

             2.0p (bar)                                  2b                                                Gas                p1 = 3.0 bar
                                                                                                                              V1 = 0.1 m3
                                    Area = work 2a                                                        pV n =              V2 = 0.2 m3
                                      for part a                                                         constant
             1.0

                               0.1                      0.2

                                  V (m3)                                                                                                       Figure E2.1

     Assumptions:

     1. The gas is a closed system.
     2. The moving boundary is the only work mode.

 3. The expansion is a polytropic process.

  Analysis: The required values for the work are obtained by integration of Eq. 2.17 using the given pressure­volume relation.

  (a) Introducing the relationship p  constantV n into Eq. 2.17 and performing the integration

                                                                 V2                    V2 constant
                                                    W  p dV                                      V n dV

                                                                V1                     V1

                                                            1constant2 V21n  1constant2 V11n
                                                                                1n

  The      constant  in  this  expression  can  be  evaluated         at    either     end       state:   constant    p1V  n    p2V 2n.  The  work  expression  then
                                                                                                                           1

  becomes

                                                        1  p2V  n  2  V 21    n    1p1V    n  2  V  1  n     p2V2    p1V1
                                                                2                          1        1
                                                W                                                                                                               (1)
                                                                            1n                                 1n

  This expression is valid for all values of n except n  1.0. The case n  1.0 is taken up in part (b).
      To evaluate W, the pressure at state 2 is required. This can be found by using p1V1n  p2V2n, which on rearrangement yields

                                                    p2     p1   a  V1    n         13  bar2   a  0.1    1.5    1.06  bar
                                                                   V2
                                                                       b                         0.2  b

  Accordingly

                                    Wa          11.06 bar2 10.2 m32  132 10.12 105 N/m2 1 kJ
                                                                                                    b ` 1 bar ` ` 103 N # m `
                                                                   1  1.5

                                            17.6 kJ
40 Chapter 2 Energy and the First Law of Thermodynamics

(b) For n  1.0, the pressure­volume relationship is pV  constant or p  constantV. The work is

                         W  constant V2  dV    1constant2          ln V2    1  p1V12  ln V2     (2)
                                    V1   V                           V1                 V1

Substituting values

                     W  13 bar2 10.1 m32 ` 105 N/m2 `  `     1 kJ  m  `  ln a0.2b     20.79 kJ
                                              1 bar       103 N #            0.1

 (c) For n  0, the pressure­volume relation reduces to p  constant, and the integral becomes W  p(V2  V1), which is a

     special case of the expression found in part (a). Substituting values and converting units as above, W  30 kJ.

 In each case, the work for the process can be interpreted as the area under the curve representing the process on the ac-

    companying p­V diagram. Note that the relative areas are in agreement with the numerical results.

 The assumption of a polytropic process is significant. If the given pressure­volume relationship were obtained as a fit to

    experimental pressure­volume data, the value of  p d V would provide a plausible estimate of the work only when the
    measured pressure is essentially equal to that exerted at the piston face.

 Observe the use of unit conversion factors here and in part (b).
 It is not necessary to identify the gas (or liquid) contained within the piston­cylinder assembly. The calculated values for

    W are determined by the process path and the end states. However, if it is desired to evaluate other properties such as tem-

    perature, both the nature and amount of the substance must be provided because appropriate relations among the proper-

    ties of the particular substance would then be required.

                      2.2.4 Further Examples of Work

                     To broaden our understanding of the work concept, we now briefly consider several other
                     examples.

                     EXTENSION OF A SOLID BAR. Consider a system consisting of a solid bar under tension,
                     as shown in Fig. 2.9. The bar is fixed at x  0, and a force F is applied at the other end. Let
                     the force be represented as F  A, where A is the cross-sectional area of the bar and  the
                     normal stress acting at the end of the bar. The work done as the end of the bar moves a
                     distance dx is given by W  A dx. The minus sign is required because work is done on
                     the bar when dx is positive. The work for a change in length from x1 to x2 is found by
                     integration

                                                               x2                               (2.18)

                                                          W   sA dx

                                                                           x1

                     Equation 2.18 for a solid is the counterpart of Eq. 2.17 for a gas undergoing an expansion
                     or compression.

                     STRETCHING OF A LIQUID FILM. Figure 2.10 shows a system consisting of a liquid film
                     suspended on a wire frame. The two surfaces of the film support the thin liquid layer inside
                     by the effect of surface tension, owing to microscopic forces between molecules near the
                     liquid­air interfaces. These forces give rise to a macroscopically measurable force perpen-
                     dicular to any line in the surface. The force per unit length across such a line is the surface
                     tension. Denoting the surface tension acting at the movable wire by , the force F indicated
                     on the figure can be expressed as F  2l, where the factor 2 is introduced because two
                     film surfaces act at the wire. If the movable wire is displaced by dx, the work is given by
                     W  2l dx. The minus sign is required because work is done on the system when dx is
                                                    Rigid wire frame  2.2 Broadening Our Understanding of Work 41
                                                    Surface of film
                                                                            Movable
                 Area = A                                                   wire

                                                                             F

              x            F                           l
                                                                                        dx
                                    x1
                                                x2                 x
                                                     Figure 2.10 Stretching of a liquid film.
 Figure 2.9 Elongation of a solid bar.

positive. Corresponding to a displacement dx is a change in the total area of the surfaces in
contact with the wire of dA  2l dx, so the expression for work can be written alternatively
as W   dA. The work for an increase in surface area from A1 to A2 is found by
integrating this expression

                                A2                                                  (2.19)

                           W   t dA

                                            A1

POWER TRANSMITTED BY A SHAFT. A rotating shaft is a commonly encountered ma- +                                                                                           Motor    W shaft
chine element. Consider a shaft rotating with angular velocity  and exerting a torque t on                                                                                                ,

                                                                                                                                                                      ­

its surroundings. Let the torque be expressed in terms of a tangential force Ft and radius
R: t  FtR. The velocity at the point of application of the force is V  R, where  is in

radians per unit time. Using these relations with Eq. 2.13, we obtain an expression for the

power transmitted from the shaft to the surroundings

                  #                                                                 (2.20)

                 W  FtV  1tR2 1Rv2  tv

A related case involving a gas stirred by a paddle wheel is considered in the discussion of
Fig. 2.3.

ELECTRIC POWER. Shown in Fig. 2.11 is a system consisting of an electrolytic cell. The

cell is connected to an external circuit through which an electric current, i, is flowing. The        ­                                                                  i

current is driven by the electrical potential difference e existing across the terminals labeled      +                                                                         
                                                                                                  System
a and b. That this type of interaction can be classed as work is considered in the discussion     boundary                                                                  a                b

of Fig. 2.3.

The rate of energy transfer by work, or the power, is                                                                                                                          Electrolytic
                                                                                                                                                                                   cell
                                                     #
                                                    W  ei                           (2.21)

Since the current i equals dZdt, the work can be expressed in differential form as                 Figure 2.11 Electro-
                                                                                                  lytic cell used to discuss
                                                    dW  e dZ                        (2.22)        electric power.

where dZ is the amount of electrical charge that flows into the system. The minus signs are
required to be in accord with our previously stated sign convention for work. When the power
is evaluated in terms of the watt, and the unit of current is the ampere (an SI base unit), the
unit of electric potential is the volt, defined as 1 watt per ampere.

WORK DUE TO POLARIZATION OR MAGNETIZATION. Let us next refer briefly to the
types of work that can be done on systems residing in electric or magnetic fields, known as
the work of polarization and magnetization, respectively. From the microscopic viewpoint,
42 Chapter 2 Energy and the First Law of Thermodynamics

                                electrical dipoles within dielectrics resist turning, so work is done when they are aligned by
                                an electric field. Similarly, magnetic dipoles resist turning, so work is done on certain other
                                materials when their magnetization is changed. Polarization and magnetization give rise to
                                macroscopically detectable changes in the total dipole moment as the particles making up
                                the material are given new alignments. In these cases the work is associated with forces im-
                                posed on the overall system by fields in the surroundings. Forces acting on the material in
                                the system interior are called body forces. For such forces the appropriate displacement in
                                evaluating work is the displacement of the matter on which the body force acts. Forces act-
                                ing at the boundary are called surface forces. Examples of work done by surface forces
                                include the expansion or compression of a gas (or liquid) and the extension of a solid.

 2.2.5 Further Examples of Work in Quasiequilibrium Processes

Systems other than a gas or liquid in a piston­cylinder assembly can also be envisioned as
undergoing processes in a quasiequilibrium fashion. To apply the quasiequilibrium process
concept in any such case, it is necessary to conceive of an ideal situation in which the ex-
ternal forces acting on the system can be varied so slightly that the resulting imbalance is
infinitesimal. As a consequence, the system undergoes a process without ever departing sig-
nificantly from thermodynamic equilibrium.

   The extension of a solid bar and the stretching of a liquid surface can readily be envisioned
to occur in a quasiequilibrium manner by direct analogy to the piston­cylinder case. For the
bar in Fig. 2.9 the external force can be applied in such a way that it differs only slightly from
the opposing force within. The normal stress is then essentially uniform throughout and can
be determined as a function of the instantaneous length:   (x). Similarly, for the liquid
film shown in Fig. 2.10 the external force can be applied to the movable wire in such a way
that the force differs only slightly from the opposing force within the film. During such a
process, the surface tension is essentially uniform throughout the film and is functionally re-
lated to the instantaneous area:   (A). In each of these cases, once the required functional
relationship is known, the work can be evaluated using Eq. 2.18 or 2.19, respectively, in terms
of properties of the system as a whole as it passes through equilibrium states.

   Other systems can also be imagined as undergoing quasiequilibrium processes. For ex-
ample, it is possible to envision an electrolytic cell being charged or discharged in a quasi-
equilibrium manner by adjusting the potential difference across the terminals to be slightly
greater, or slightly less, than an ideal potential called the cell electromotive force (emf). The
energy transfer by work for passage of a differential quantity of charge to the cell, dZ, is
given by the relation

dW  e dZ          (2.23)

In this equation e denotes the cell emf, an intensive property of the cell, and not just the po-
tential difference across the terminals as in Eq. 2.22.

   Consider next a dielectric material residing in a uniform electric field. The energy trans-
ferred by work from the field when the polarization is increased slightly is

dW  E # d1VP2     (2.24)

where the vector E is the electric field strength within the system, the vector P is the elec-
tric dipole moment per unit volume, and V is the volume of the system. A similar equation
for energy transfer by work from a uniform magnetic field when the magnetization is increased
slightly is

dW  m0H # d1V M2  (2.25)

where the vector H is the magnetic field strength within the system, the vector M is the mag-
netic dipole moment per unit volume, and 0 is a constant, the permeability of free space.
                                                                                                    2.3 Broadening Our Understanding of Energy 43

The minus signs appearing in the last three equations are in accord with our previously stated
sign convention for work: W takes on a negative value when the energy transfer is into the
system.

GENERALIZED FORCES AND DISPLACEMENTS                                                                   Paddle
                                                                                                       wheel
The similarity between the expressions for work in the quasiequilibrium processes consid-
ered thus far should be noted. In each case, the work expression is written in the form of an      Gas
intensive property and the differential of an extensive property. This is brought out by the
following expression, which allows for one or more of these work modes to be involved in
a process

     dW  p dV  sd 1A x2  t dA  e dZ  E # d1V P2  m0H # d1V M2  # # # (2.26)

where the last three dots represent other products of an intensive property and the differential
of a related extensive property that account for work. Because of the notion of work being
a product of force and displacement, the intensive property in these relations is sometimes
referred to as a "generalized" force and the extensive property as a "generalized" displace-
ment, even though the quantities making up the work expressions may not bring to mind
actual forces and displacements.

   Owing to the underlying quasiequilibrium restriction, Eq. 2.26 does not represent every
type of work of practical interest. An example is provided by a paddle wheel that stirs a gas
or liquid taken as the system. Whenever any shearing action takes place, the system necessarily
passes through nonequilibrium states. To appreciate more fully the implications of the qua-
siequilibrium process concept requires consideration of the second law of thermodynamics,
so this concept is discussed again in Chap. 5 after the second law has been introduced.

2.3 Broadening Our Understanding of Energy                                                         F

The objective in this section is to use our deeper understanding of work developed in Sec. 2.2

to broaden our understanding of the energy of a system. In particular, we consider the total

energy of a system, which includes kinetic energy, gravitational potential energy, and other

forms of energy. The examples to follow illustrate some of these forms of energy. Many other

examples could be provided that enlarge on the same idea.

When work is done to compress a spring, energy is stored within the spring. When a bat-

tery is charged, the energy stored within it is increased. And when a gas (or liquid) initially

at an equilibrium state in a closed, insulated vessel is stirred vigorously and allowed to come

to a final equilibrium state, the energy of the gas is increased in the process. In each of these              i

examples the change in system energy cannot be attributed to changes in the system's overall

kinetic or gravitational potential energy as given by Eqs. 2.5 and 2.10, respectively.

The change in energy can be accounted for in terms of internal energy, as considered next.

In engineering thermodynamics the change in the total energy of a system is considered

to be made up of three macroscopic contributions. One is the change in kinetic energy, as-         Battery
sociated with the motion of the system as a whole relative to an external coordinate frame.

Another is the change in gravitational potential energy, associated with the position of the

system as a whole in the earth's gravitational field. All other energy changes are lumped to-

gether in the internal energy of the system. Like kinetic energy and gravitational potential internal energy

energy, internal energy is an extensive property of the system, as is the total energy.

Internal energy is represented by the symbol U, and the change in internal energy in a

process is U2  U1. The specific internal energy is symbolized by u or u, respectively, de-
pending on whether it is expressed on a unit mass or per mole basis.
44 Chapter 2 Energy and the First Law of Thermodynamics

                                    The change in the total energy of a system is

                                       E2  E1  1KE2  KE12  1PE2  PE12  1U2  U12

                                   or                                              (2.27)

                                       ˘E  ˘KE  ˘PE  ˘U

microscopic                        All quantities in Eq. 2.27 are expressed in terms of the energy units previously introduced.
interpretation of internal            The identification of internal energy as a macroscopic form of energy is a significant step
energy for a gas
                                   in the present development, for it sets the concept of energy in thermodynamics apart from
                                   that of mechanics. In Chap. 3 we will learn how to evaluate changes in internal energy for
                                   practically important cases involving gases, liquids, and solids by using empirical data.

                                      To further our understanding of internal energy, consider a system we will often encounter
                                   in subsequent sections of the book, a system consisting of a gas contained in a tank. Let us
                                   develop a microscopic interpretation of internal energy by thinking of the energy attributed
                                   to the motions and configurations of the individual molecules, atoms, and subatomic parti-
                                   cles making up the matter in the system. Gas molecules move about, encountering other mol-
                                   ecules or the walls of the container. Part of the internal energy of the gas is the translational
                                   kinetic energy of the molecules. Other contributions to the internal energy include the kinetic
                                   energy due to rotation of the molecules relative to their centers of mass and the kinetic energy
                                   associated with vibrational motions within the molecules. In addition, energy is stored in the
                                   chemical bonds between the atoms that make up the molecules. Energy storage on the atomic
                                   level includes energy associated with electron orbital states, nuclear spin, and binding forces
                                   in the nucleus. In dense gases, liquids, and solids, intermolecular forces play an important
                                   role in affecting the internal energy.

           Gas                     2.4 Energy Transfer by Heat
                        Hot plate
                                   Thus far, we have considered quantitatively only those interactions between a system and its
energy transfer by heat            surroundings that can be classed as work. However, closed systems also can interact with
                                   their surroundings in a way that cannot be categorized as work.  for example. . . when
                                   a gas in a rigid container interacts with a hot plate, the energy of the gas is increased even
                                   though no work is done.  This type of interaction is called an energy transfer by heat.

                                       On the basis of experiment, beginning with the work of Joule in the early part of the nine-
                                   teenth century, we know that energy transfers by heat are induced only as a result of a tem-
                                   perature difference between the system and its surroundings and occur only in the direction
                                   of decreasing temperature. Because the underlying concept is so important in thermody-
                                   namics, this section is devoted to a further consideration of energy transfer by heat.

sign convention for                 2.4.1 Sign Convention, Notation, and Heat Transfer Rate
heat transfer
                                   The symbol Q denotes an amount of energy transferred across the boundary of a system in
                                   a heat interaction with the system's surroundings. Heat transfer into a system is taken to be
                                   positive, and heat transfer from a system is taken as negative.

                                                                    Q 7 0: heat transfer to the system
                                                                    Q 6 0: heat transfer from the system

                                   This sign convention is used throughout the book. However, as was indicated for work, it is
                                   sometimes convenient to show the direction of energy transfer by an arrow on a sketch of
                                                                                                          2.4 Energy Transfer by Heat 45

the system. Then the heat transfer is regarded as positive in the direction of the arrow. In an                       heat is not a property
adiabatic process there is no energy transfer by heat.

   The sign convention for heat transfer is just the reverse of the one adopted for work, where
a positive value for W signifies an energy transfer from the system to the surroundings. These
signs for heat and work are a legacy from engineers and scientists who were concerned mainly
with steam engines and other devices that develop a work output from an energy input by
heat transfer. For such applications, it was convenient to regard both the work developed and
the energy input by heat transfer as positive quantities.

   The value of a heat transfer depends on the details of a process and not just the end states.
Thus, like work, heat is not a property, and its differential is written as Q. The amount of
energy transfer by heat for a process is given by the integral

                                                          2                                               (2.28)

                                              Q  dQ
                                                         1

where the limits mean "from state 1 to state 2" and do not refer to the values of heat at those

states. As for work, the notion of "heat" at a state has no meaning, and the integral should

never be evaluated as Q2  Q1.                             #

The net rate of heat transfer is denoted by Q. In principle, the amount of energy trans-                              rate of heat transfer

fer by heat during a period of time can be found by integrating from time t1 to time t2

                                                t2 #                                                      (2.29)

                                             Q  Q dt

                                                         t1

To perform the integration, it would be necessary to know how the rate of heat transfer varies

with time.                                                          #

In  some      cases  it  is  convenient  to  use  the  heat  flux,  q,  w# hich  is  the  heat  transfer  rate   per
                                                                                                              #
unit of system surface area. The net rate of heat transfer, Q, is related to the heat flux q by

the integral

                                              #           #                                               (2.30)
                                                          q dA
                                             Q
                                                       A

where A represents the area on the boundary of the system where heat transfer occurs.

                             #                                                                                   #

UNITS. The units for Q and Q are the same as those introduced previously for W and W,

respectively. The units for the heat flux are those of the heat transfer rate per unit area: kW/m2

or Btu /h # ft2.

 2.4.2 Heat Transfer Modes

Methods based on experiment are available for evaluating energy transfer by heat. These

methods recognize two basic transfer mechanisms: conduction and thermal radiation. In ad-

dition, empirical relationships are available for evaluating energy transfer involving certain                        .   T1
combined modes. A brief description of each of these is given next. A detailed consideration                          Qx
                                                                                                                                  T2
is left to a course in engineering heat transfer, where these topics are studied in depth.                                    L

CONDUCTION                                                                                                                           Area, A
                                                                                                                                             x

Energy transfer by conduction can take place in solids, liquids, and gases. Conduction can                             Figure 2.12 Illus-
be thought of as the transfer of energy from the more energetic particles of a substance to                           tration of Fourier's
adjacent particles that are less energetic due to interactions between particles. The time rate                       conduction law.
of energy transfer by conduction is quantified macroscopically by Fourier's law. As an ele-
mentary application, consider Fig. 2.12 showing a plane wall of thickness L at steady state,
46 Chapter 2 Energy and the First Law of Thermodynamics

                      where the temperature T(x) varies linearly with positio# n x. By Fourier's law, the rate of heat
                      transfer across any plane normal to the x direction, Qx, is proportional to the wall area, A,
                      and the temperature gradient in the x direction, dTdx

                                                               #           dT

Fourier's law                                                  Qx  kA dx               (2.31)

                      where the proportionality constant  is a property called the thermal conductivity. The
                      minus sign is a consequence of energy transfer in the direction of decreasing temperature.
                       for example. . . in this case the temperature varies linearly; thus, the temperature
                      gradient is

                                                         dT  T2  T1 16 02
                                                         dx            L

                      and the rate of heat transfer in the x direction is then

                                                          #    kA c    T2     T1  d    (2.32)
                                                         Qx                L

                         Values of thermal conductivity are given in Table A-19 for common materials. Substances
                      with large values of thermal conductivity such as copper are good conductors, and those with
                      small conductivities (cork and polystyrene foam) are good insulators.

                      RADIATION

                      Thermal radiation is emitted by matter as a result of changes in the electronic configura-

                      tions of the atoms or molecules within it. The energy is transported by electromagnetic

                      waves (or photons). Unlike conduction, thermal radiation requires no intervening medium

                      to propagate and can even take place in a vacuum. Solid surfaces, gases, and liquids all

                      emit, absorb#, and transmit thermal radiation to varying degrees. The rate at which energy
                      is emitted, Qe, from a surface of area A is quantified macroscopically by a modified form
                      of the Stefan­Boltzmann law

                                                                  #           4
                                                                              b
Stefan­Boltzmann law                                           Qe      esAT            (2.33)

                      which shows that thermal radiation is associated with the fourth power of the absolute tem-
                      perature of the surface, Tb. The emissivity, , is a property of the surface that indicates how
                      effectively the surface radiates (0    1.0), and  is the Stefan­Boltzmann constant. In
                      general, the net rate of energy transfer by thermal radiation between two surfaces involves
                      relationships among the properties of the surfaces, their orientations with respect to each
                      other, the extent to which the intervening medium scatters, emits, and absorbs thermal radi-
                      ation, and other factors.

                      CONVECTION

                      Energy transfer between a solid surface at a temperature Tb and an adjacent moving gas or
                      liquid at another temperature Tf plays a prominent role in the performance of many devices
                      of practical interest. This is commonly referred to as convection. As an illustration, consider

                      Fig. 2.13, where Tb  Tf. In this case, energy is transferred in the direction indicated by the
                      arrow due to the combined effects of conduction within the air and the bulk motion of the

                      air. The rate of energy transfer from the surface to the air can be quantified by the following

                      empirical expression:

                                                              #                        (2.34)
                                                             Qc  hA1Tb  Tf2
                                                          2.4 Energy Transfer by Heat 47

Cooling air flow           .

Tf < Tb                    Qc

                       Tb
                     A

         Transistor            Wire leads
                                           Circuit board
                                                           Figure 2.13 Illustration of
                                                          Newton's law of cooling.

known as Newton's law of cooling. In Eq. 2.34, A is the surface area and the proportionality       Newton's law of cooling
factor h is called the heat transfer coefficient. In subsequent applications of Eq. 2.34, a minus
sign may be introduced on the right side to conform to the sign convention for heat transfer
introduced in Sec. 2.4.1.

   The heat transfer coefficient is not a thermodynamic property. It is an empirical parame-
ter that incorporates into the heat transfer relationship the nature of the flow pattern near the
surface, the fluid properties, and the geometry. When fans or pumps cause the fluid to move,
the value of the heat transfer coefficient is generally greater than when relatively slow
buoyancy-induced motions occur. These two general categories are called forced and free (or
natural) convection, respectively. Table 2.1 provides typical values of the convection heat
transfer coefficient for forced and free convection.

 2.4.3 Closure

The first step in a thermodynamic analysis is to define the system. It is only after the sys-
tem boundary has been specified that possible heat interactions with the surroundings are
considered, for these are always evaluated at the system boundary. In ordinary conversation,
the term heat is often used when the word energy would be more correct thermodynamically.
For example, one might hear, "Please close the door or `heat' will be lost." In thermodyn-
amics, heat refers only to a particular means whereby energy is transferred. It does not re-
fer to what is being transferred between systems or to what is stored within systems. Energy
is transferred and stored, not heat.

   Sometimes the heat transfer of energy to, or from, a system can be neglected. This might
occur for several reasons related to the mechanisms for heat transfer discussed above. One
might be that the materials surrounding the system are good insulators, or heat transfer might
not be significant because there is a small temperature difference between the system and its
surroundings. A third reason is that there might not be enough surface area to allow signif-
icant heat transfer to occur. When heat transfer is neglected, it is because one or more of
these considerations apply.

TABLE 2.1 Typical Values of the
Convection Heat Transfer Coefficient

Applications         h (W/m2 # K)

Free convection       2­25
   Gases             50­1000
   Liquids
                     25­250
Forced convection    50­20,000
   Gases
   Liquids
48 Chapter 2 Energy and the First Law of Thermodynamics

                     In the discussions to follow the value of Q is provided, or it is an unknown in the analy-
                  sis. When Q is provided, it can be assumed that the value has been determined by the meth-
                  ods introduced above. When Q is the unknown, its value is usually found by using the energy
                  balance, discussed next.

                  2.5 Energy Accounting: Energy Balance
                           for Closed Systems

first law of      As our previous discussions indicate, the only ways the energy of a closed system can be changed
thermodynamics    are through transfer of energy by work or by heat. Further, based on the experiments of Joule
                  and others, a fundamental aspect of the energy concept is that energy is conserved; we call this
                  the first law of thermodynamics. These considerations are summarized in words as follows:

                  change in the amount                   net amount of energy   net amount of energy

                  of energy contained                    transferred in across  transferred out across

                  D within the system T  Dthe system boundary byT  D the system boundary T

                  during some time                       heat transfer during   by work during the

                  interval                               the time interval      time interval

                  This word statement is just an accounting balance for energy, an energy balance. It requires
                  that in any process of a closed system the energy of the system increases or decreases by an
                  amount equal to the net amount of energy transferred across its boundary.

                     The phrase net amount used in the word statement of the energy balance must be care-
                  fully interpreted, for there may be heat or work transfers of energy at many different places
                  on the boundary of a system. At some locations the energy transfers may be into the system,
                  whereas at others they are out of the system. The two terms on the right side account for the
                  net results of all the energy transfers by heat and work, respectively, taking place during the
                  time interval under consideration.

                     The energy balance can be expressed in symbols as

                                                         E2  E1  Q  W                                   (2.35a)

energy balance    Introducing Eq. 2.27 an alternative form is

                                        ˘KE  ˘PE  ˘U  Q  W                                              (2.35b)

                  which shows that an energy transfer across the system boundary results in a change in one
                  or more of the macroscopic energy forms: kinetic energy, gravitational potential energy, and
                  internal energy. All previous references to energy as a conserved quantity are included as
                  special cases of Eqs. 2.35.

                     Note that the algebraic signs before the heat and work terms of Eqs. 2.35 are different.
                  This follows from the sign conventions previously adopted. A minus sign appears before W
                  because energy transfer by work from the system to the surroundings is taken to be positive.
                  A plus sign appears before Q because it is regarded to be positive when the heat transfer of
                  energy is into the system from the surroundings.

                  OTHER FORMS OF THE ENERGY BALANCE

                  Various special forms of the energy balance can be written. For example, the energy balance
                  in differential form is

                                                         dE  dQ  dW                                     (2.36)
                                                                                2.5 Energy Accounting: Energy Balance for Closed Systems 49

where dE is the differential of energy, a property. Since Q and W are not properties, their
differentials are written as Q and W, respectively.

   The instantaneous time rate form of the energy balance is

                       dE     #                     #                             (2.37) etinmeergryatbeafloarnmceof the
                             Q                     W
                       dt

The rate form of the energy balance expressed in words is

time rate of change net rate at which net rate at which

of the energy          energy is being                           energy is being

D contained within T  D transferred in T  D transferred out T

the system at          by heat transfer                          by work at

time t                     at time t                             time t

Since the time rate of change of energy is given by

               dE  d KE  dPE  dU
               dt dt                             dt dt

Equation 2.37 can be expressed alternatively as

               d KE    d PE      dU                     #     #                   (2.38)
                                                       Q     W
               dt dt dt

   Equations 2.35 through 2.38 provide alternative forms of the energy balance that may be
convenient starting points when applying the principle of conservation of energy to closed
systems. In Chap. 4 the conservation of energy principle is expressed in forms suitable for the
analysis of control volumes. When applying the energy balance in any of its forms, it is im-
portant to be careful about signs and units and to distinguish carefully between rates and
amounts. In addition, it is important to recognize that the location of the system boundary can
be relevant in determining whether a particular energy transfer is regarded as heat or work.

    for example. . . consider Fig. 2.14, in which three alternative systems are shown
that include a quantity of a gas (or liquid) in a rigid, well-insulated container. In Fig. 2.14a,
the gas itself is the system. As current flows through the copper plate, there is an energy
transfer from the copper plate to the gas. Since this energy transfer occurs as a result of the
temperature difference between the plate and the gas, it is classified as a heat transfer. Next,
refer to Fig. 2.14b, where the boundary is drawn to include the copper plate. It follows from
the thermodynamic definition of work that the energy transfer that occurs as current crosses
the boundary of this system must be regarded as work. Finally, in Fig. 2.14c, the boundary
is located so that no energy is transferred across it by heat or work. 

CLOSING COMMENT. Thus far, we have been careful to emphasize that the quantities sym-
bolized by W and Q in the foregoing equations account for transfers of energy and not transfers
of work and heat, respectively. The terms work and heat denote different means whereby en-
ergy is transferred and not what is transferred. However, to achieve economy of expression in
subsequent discussions, W and Q are often referred to simply as work and heat transfer,
respectively. This less formal manner of speaking is commonly used in engineering practice.

ILLUSTRATIONS

The examples to follow bring out many important ideas about energy and the energy balance.
They should be studied carefully, and similar approaches should be used when solving the
end-of-chapter problems.
50 Chapter 2 Energy and the First Law of Thermodynamics

                     Copper Rotating

                     plate  shaft

      Gas or liquid  +                                                          Gas       +
              Q      ­
                                                                                or W
          W=0            Electric
                        generator                                     liquid              ­
 System Insulation
boundary                                                               System        Q=0
                                                                      boundary

                                                             Mass

                     (a)                                                                  (b)

                            Gas                                    +

                                                         or

                            liquid                                 ­

                                                                           System
                                                                          boundary Q = 0, W = 0

                                                                                                         (c)
                                 Figure 2.14 Alternative choices for system boundaries.

                                In this text, most applications of the energy balance will not involve significant kinetic or
                            potential energy changes. Thus, to expedite the solutions of many subsequent examples and
                            end-of-chapter problems, we indicate in the problem statement that such changes can be neg-
                            lected. If this is not made explicit in a problem statement, you should decide on the basis of
                            the problem at hand how best to handle the kinetic and potential energy terms of the energy
                            balance.

                            PROCESSES OF CLOSED SYSTEMS. The next two examples illustrate the use of the energy
                            balance for processes of closed systems. In these examples, internal energy data are provided.
                            In Chap. 3, we learn how to obtain thermodynamic property data using tables, graphs, equa-
                            tions, and computer software.

E X A M P L E 2 . 2 Cooling a Gas in a Piston­Cylinder

Four kilograms of a certain gas is contained within a piston­cylinder assembly. The gas undergoes a process for which the
pressure­volume relationship is

                                                                  pV1.5  constant
The initial pressure is 3 bar, the initial volume is 0.1 m3, and the final volume is 0.2 m3. The change in specific internal energy
of the gas in the process is u2  u1  4.6 kJ/kg. There are no significant changes in kinetic or potential energy. Determine
the net heat transfer for the process, in kJ.
                                                               2.5 Energy Accounting: Energy Balance for Closed Systems 51

SOLUTION
Known: A gas within a piston­cylinder assembly undergoes an expansion process for which the pressure­volume relation
and the change in specific internal energy are specified.
Find: Determine the net heat transfer for the process.
Schematic and Given Data:

        p  1                                                          u2 ­ u1 = ­ 4.6 kJ/kg

                        pV1.5 = constant                                  Gas
                                                                        pV1.5 =
                                          2                            constant
                   Area = work

                                             V
                                                                                                                             Figure E2.2

Assumptions:

1. The gas is a closed system.
2. The process is described by pV1.5  constant.
3. There is no change in the kinetic or potential energy of the system.

Analysis: An energy balance for the closed system takes the form

                                                     0             0

                                                   ˘KE  ˘PE  ˘U  Q  W

where the kinetic and potential energy terms drop out by assumption 3. Then, writing U in terms of specific internal ener-
gies, the energy balance becomes

                                                     m1u2  u12  Q  W

where m is the system mass. Solving for Q

                                                               Q  m1u2  u12  W

    The value of the work for this process is determined in the solution to part (a) of Example 2.1: W  17.6 kJ. The change
in internal energy is obtained using given data as

                                             m1u2    u12    4  kg  a4.6 kJ b     18.4  kJ
                                                                           kg

     Substituting values                           Q  18.4  17.6  0.8 kJ



 The given relationship between pressure and volume allows the process to be represented by the path shown on the ac-

    companying diagram. The area under the curve represents the work. Since they are not properties, the values of the work

    and heat transfer depend on the details of the process and cannot be determined from the end states only.

 The minus sign for the value of Q means that a net amount of energy has been transferred from the system to its sur-

    roundings by heat transfer.
52 Chapter 2 Energy and the First Law of Thermodynamics

                                    In the next example, we follow up the discussion of Fig. 2.14 by considering two alter-
                                native systems. This example highlights the need to account correctly for the heat and work
                                interactions occurring on the boundary as well as the energy change.

E X A M P L E 2 . 3 Considering Alternative Systems

Air is contained in a vertical piston­cylinder assembly fitted with an electrical resistor. The atmosphere exerts a pressure of
1 bar on the top of the piston, which has a mass of 45 kg and a face area of .09 m2. Electric current passes through the
resistor, and the volume of the air slowly increases by .045 m3 while its pressure remains constant. The mass of the air is
.27 kg, and its specific internal energy increases by 42 kJ/kg. The air and piston are at rest initially and finally. The
piston­cylinder material is a ceramic composite and thus a good insulator. Friction between the piston and cylinder wall can
be ignored, and the local acceleration of gravity is g  9.81 m/s2. Determine the heat transfer from the resistor to the air, in
kJ, for a system consisting of (a) the air alone, (b) the air and the piston.

SOLUTION

Known: Data are provided for air contained in a vertical piston­cylinder fitted with an electrical resistor.

Find: Considering each of two alternative systems, determine the heat transfer from the resistor to the air.

Schematic and Given Data:

                                 Piston    patm = 1 bar               Piston
                                           mpiston = 45 kg
System                                     Apiston = .09 m2                   System
boundary                                                                      boundary
for part (a)                             +                                    for part (b)

                       Air                                                                       +
                                                                  Air

                                         ­                                              ­

                                                mair = .27 kg     (b)
                                            V2 ­ V1 = .045 m3                                                Figure E2.3

                            (a)             uair = 42 kJ/kg.

Assumptions:

     1. Two closed systems are under consideration, as shown in the schematic.

     2. The only significant heat transfer is from the resistor to the air, during which the air expands slowly and its pressure remains
     constant.

 3. There is no net change in kinetic energy; the change in potential energy of the air is negligible; and since the piston material

     is a good insulator, the internal energy of the piston is not affected by the heat transfer.

     4. Friction between the piston and cylinder wall is negligible.
     5. The acceleration of gravity is constant; g  9.81 m/s2.

Analysis: (a) Taking the air as the system, the energy balance, Eq. 2.35, reduces with assumption 3 to

                                            0                  0
                                            1 ˘KE  ˘PE  ˘U2air  Q  W

Or, solving for Q

                                               Q  W  ˘Uair
                                                       2.5 Energy Accounting: Energy Balance for Closed Systems 53

    For this system, work is done by the force of the pressure p acting on the bottom of the piston as the air expands. With
Eq. 2.17 and the assumption of constant pressure

                                  V2

                                                          W  p dV  p 1V2  V12

                                                                                                       V1

    To determine the pressure p, we use a force balance on the slowly moving, frictionless piston. The upward force exerted
by the air on the bottom of the piston equals the weight of the piston plus the downward force of the atmosphere acting on
the top of the piston. In symbols

                                                         p Apiston  mpiston g  patmApiston

Solving for p and inserting values

                   p    mpiston g    patm
                         Apiston

                   p    145 kg2 19.81 m/s22         `    1  bar     `     1 bar        1.049 bar
                               .09 m2                  105  N / m2

Thus, the work is

                   W  p 1V2  V12

                    11.049 bar2 1.045 m22 ` 105 N/m2 `                 `     1 kJ  m      `   4.72 kJ
                                                    1 bar                 103 N #

With Uair  mair(uair), the heat transfer is

                                                      Q  W  mair 1 ˘uair2
                                                           4.72 kJ  11.07 kJ  15.8 kJ

(b) Consider next a system consisting of the air and the piston. The energy change of the overall system is the sum of the
energy changes of the air and the piston. Thus, the energy balance, Eq. 2.35, reads

                   0    0                                   0                          0
                   1 ˘KE  ˘PE  ˘U2air  1 ˘KE  ˘PE  ˘U 2piston  Q  W

where the indicated terms drop out by assumption 3. Solving for Q

                                   Q  W  1 ˘PE2piston  1 ˘U2air

For this system, work is done at the top of the piston as it pushes aside the surrounding atmosphere. Applying Eq. 2.17

                       V2

                   W  p dV  patm 1V2  V12

                                V1

                       11 bar2 1.045 m22 ` 105 N/m2 `                      1 kJ         4.5 kJ
                                                 1 bar                 ` 103 N # m `

    The elevation change, z, required to evaluate the potential energy change of the piston can be found from the volume
change of the air and the area of the piston face as

                           ˘z        V2  V1                 .045 m3         .5  m
                                      Apiston               .09 m2

Thus, the potential energy change of the piston is

                      1 ˘PE2piston  mpiston g˘z
                                    145 kg2 19.81 m/s22 10.5 m2  .22 kJ
 54 Chapter 2 Energy and the First Law of Thermodynamics

     Finally
                                                       Q  W  1 ˘PE2piston  mair˘uair
                                                           4.5 kJ  .22 kJ  11.07 kJ  15.8 kJ

 which agrees with the result of part (a).

    Using the change in elevation z determined in the analysis, the change in potential energy of the air is about 103 Btu,

         which is negligible in the present case. The calculation is left as an exercise.

    Although the value of Q is the same for each system, observe that the values for W differ. Also, observe that the energy

         changes differ, depending on whether the air alone or the air and the piston is the system.

                      STEADY-STATE OPERATION. A system is at steady state if none of its properties change
                      with time (Sec. 1.3). Many devices operate at steady state or nearly at steady state, meaning
                      that property variations with time are small enough to ignore. The two examples to follow
                      illustrate the application of the energy rate equation to closed systems at steady state.

E X A M P L E 2 . 4 Gearbox at Steady State

During steady-state operation, a gearbox receives 60 kW through the input shaft and delivers power through the output shaft.
For the gearbox as the system, the rate of energy transfer by convection is

                                                                 #
                                                                Q  hA1Tb  Tf2
where h  0.171 kW/m2 K is the heat transfer coefficient, A  1.0 m2 is the outer surface area of the gearbox, Tb 
300 K (27C) is the temperature at the outer surface, and Tf  293 K (20C) is the temperature of the surrounding air
away from the immediate vicinity of the gearbox. For the gearbox, evaluate the heat transfer rate and the power delivered
through the output shaft, each in kW.

SOLUTION

Known: A gearbox operates at steady state with a known power input. An expression for the heat transfer rate from the outer
surface is also known.

Find: Determine the heat transfer rate and the power delivered through the output shaft, each in kW.

Schematic and Given Data:

                               Tb = 300 K

W1 = ­60 kW                    Tf = 293 K            Assumption: The gearbox is a closed system at
        1                       h = 0.171 kW/m2 · K  steady state.

          Input                     2
          shaft
                      Gearbox
       Outer surface
        A = 1.0 m2             Output
                               shaft

                                                      Figure E2.4
                                                               2.5 Energy Accounting: Energy Balance for Closed Systems 55

                                                        #
  Analysis: Using the given expression for Q together with known data, the rate of energy transfer by heat is

                                    #
                                   Q  hA1Tb  Tf2

                                     a  0.171   kW             b  11.0  m22  1300    2932  K
                                               m2 # K

                                    1.2 kW

                           #
  The minus sign for Q signals that energy is carried out of the gearbox by heat transfer.

  The energy rate balance, Eq. 2.37, reduces at steady state to

                                            0

                                        dE         ##             or     ##
                                               QW                       WQ
                                        dt

     #                                                                                        #                #

  The symbol W represents the net power from the system. The net power is the sum of W1 and the output power W2

                                                ## #
                                               W  W1  W2

                                  #
  With this expression for W, the energy rate balance becomes

                                                # ##
                                               W1  W2  Q

  #     #                            #

  Solving for W2, inserting Q  1.2 kW, and W1  60 kW, where the minus sign is required because the input shaft brings

  energy into the system, we have

                                      # ##
                                     W2  Q  W1

                                             11.2 kW2  160 kW2

                                             58.8 kW

                              #
  The positive sign for W2 indicates that energy is transferred from the system through the output shaft, as expected.

   In accord with #the sign convention for the heat transfer rate in the energy rate balance (Eq. 2.37), Eq. 2.34 is written with

      a minus sign: Q is negative when Tb is greater than Tf.

   Properties of a system at steady state do not change with time. Energy E is a property, but heat transfer and work are not

      properties.

   For this system energy transfer by work occurs at two different locations, and the signs associated with their values differ.

   At steady state, the rate of heat transfer from the gear box accounts for the difference between the input and output power.

      This can be summarized by the following energy rate "balance sheet" in terms of magnitudes:

                                               Input                             Output
                                          60 kW (input shaft)
                                                                        58.8 kW (output shaft)
                                   Total: 60 kW                          1.2 kW (heat transfer)

                                                                        60 kW

  E X A M P L E 2 . 5 Silicon Chip at Steady State

  A silicon chip measuring 5 mm on a side and 1 mm in thickness is embedded in a ceramic substrate. At steady state, the chip
  has an electrical power input of 0.225 W. The top surface of the chip is exposed to a coolant whose temperature is 20C. The
  heat transfer coefficient for convection between the chip and the coolant is 150 W/m2 # K. If heat transfer by conduction be-
  tween the chip and the substrate is negligible, determine the surface temperature of the chip, in C.
56 Chapter 2 Energy and the First Law of Thermodynamics

  SOLUTION
  Known: A silicon chip of known dimensions is exposed on its top surface to a coolant. The electrical power input and con-
  vective heat transfer coefficient are known.
  Find: Determine the surface temperature of the chip at steady state.
  Schematic and Given Data:

  Coolant                           1 mm     Assumptions:

   h = 150 W/m2 · K                          1. The chip is a closed system at steady state.
                                             2. There is no heat transfer between the chip and the substrate.
  Tf = 20° C
                      5 mm 5 mm
                                Tb
                           +­

            W = ­0.225 W

                      Ceramic substrate       Figure E2.5

  Analysis: The surface temperature of the chip, Tb, can be determined using the energy rate balance, Eq. 2.37, which at steady
  state reduces as follows

                                                 0

                                             dE              ##
                                                         QW
                                             dt

  With assumption 2, the only heat transfer is by convection to the coolant. In this application, Newton's law of cooling, Eq. 2.34,

  takes the form

                                          #

                                          Q  hA1Tb  Tf2

  Collecting results

                                                                       #
                                          0  hA1Tb  Tf2  W

  Solving for Tb

                                                         #

                                             Tb          W     Tf
                                                         hA

                          #
  In this expression, W  0.225 W, A  25  106 m2, h  150 W/m2 # K, and Tf  293 K, giving

                                                           10.225 W2
                                          Tb  1150 W/m2 # K2 125  106 m22  293 K

                                           353 K 180°C2

   Properties of a system at steady state do not change with time. Energy E is a property, but heat transfer and work are not

      properties.

   In acco# rd with the sign convention for heat transfer in the energy rate balance (Eq. 2.37), Eq. 2.34 is written with a minus

      sign: Q is negative when Tb is greater than Tf.

                      TRANSIENT OPERATION. Many devices undergo periods of transient operation where the
                      state changes with time. This is observed during startup and shutdown periods. The next ex-
                      ample illustrates the application of the energy rate balance to an electric motor during startup.
                      The example also involves both electrical work and power transmitted by a shaft.
                                                                            2.5 Energy Accounting: Energy Balance for Closed Systems 57

E X A M P L E 2 . 6 Transient Operation of a Motor

The rate of heat transfer between a certain electric motor and its surroundings varies with time as
                                                               #
                                                              Q  0.2 3 1  e10.05t2 4

                                 #
where t is in seconds and Q is in kW. The shaft of the motor rotates at a constant speed of   100 rad/s (about 955 revo-
lutions per minute, or RPM) and applies a constant torque# of t # 18 N # m to an external load. The motor draws a constant
electric power input equal to 2.0 kW. For the motor, plot Q and W, each in kW, and the change in energy E, in kJ, as func-
tions of time from t  0 to t  120 s. Discuss.

SOLUTION

Known: A motor operates with constant electric power input, shaft speed, and applied torque. The time-varying rate of heat
transfer between the motor and its surroundings is given.

                ##
Find: Plot Q, W, and E versus time, Discuss.

Schematic and Given Data:

   Welec = ­2.0 kW  Motor     = 18 N · m                       Assumption: The system shown in the accompanying sketch
                            = 100 rad/s                        is a closed system.
        +
                            W shaft                             Figure E2.6a
        ­
                             Q = ­ 0.2 [1 ­ e(­0.05t)] kW

Analysis: The time rate of change of system energy is

                                                        dE        #      #
                                                                 Q      W
                                                           dt

#                                                                                                 #

W represents the net power from the #system: the sum of the power associated with the rotating shaft, Wshaft, and the power

associated with the electricity flow, Welec

                                                     ##                 #

                                                W  Wshaft  Welec

   #                                                 #

The rate Welec is known from the problem statement: W# elec  2.0 kW, where the negative sign is required because energy is

carried into the system by electrical work. The term Wshaft can be evaluated with Eq. 2.20 as

                           #

                           Wshaft  tv  118 N # m2 1100 rad /s2  1800 W  1.8 kW

Because energy exits the system along the rotating shaft, this energy transfer rate is positive.

   In summary

                           ##                #

                           W  Welec  Wshaft  12.0 kW2  11.8 kW2  0.2 kW

where the minus sign means that t#he electrical power input is grea# ter than the power transferred out along the shaft.
    With the foregoing result for W and the given expression for Q, the energy rate balance becomes

                              dE  0.2 3 1  e10.05t2 4  10.22  0.2e10.05t2
                              dt

Integrating

                                                 t

                                             ˘E  0.2e10.05t2 dt

                                                            0

                                                0.2                       t

                                                10.052     e10.05t2 d  4 3 1  e10.05t2 4

                                                                     0
58 Chapter 2 Energy and the First Law of Thermodynamics

                                                                                          #                          #

 The accompanying plots, Figs. E2.6b, c, are developed using the given expression for Q and th# e expre# ssions for W and
E obtained in the analysis. Because of our sign conventions for heat and work, the values of Q and W are negative. In

the first few seconds, the net rate energy is carried in by work greatly exceeds the rate energy is carried out by heat trans-

fe# r. Consequent#ly, the energy stored in the motor increases rapidly as the motor "warms up." As time elapses, the value of
Q approaches W, and the rate of energy storage diminishes. After about 100 s, this transient operating mode is nearly over,

and there is little further change in the amount of energy stored, or in any other property. We may say that the motor is

 then at steady state.

       5                                                                    ­0.05
       4
       3
       2
       1
       0

         0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
                                  Time, s

 Figure E2.6b, c
E, kJ                                                                       ­0.10

                                                                  Q, W, kW            Q·

                                                                            ­0.15  W

                                                                            ­0.20

                                                                            ­0.25
                                                                                   0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
                                                                                                           Time, s

 Figures E.2.6b, c can be developed using appropriate software or can be drawn by hand.

                                         #

 At steady state, the value of Q is constant at 0.2 kW. This constant value for the heat transfer rate can be thought of as

    the portion of the electrical power input that is not obtained as a mechanical power output because of effects within the

    motor such as electrical resistance and friction.

                        2.6 Energy Analysis of Cycles

                        In this section the energy concepts developed thus far are illustrated further by application
                        to systems undergoing thermodynamic cycles. Recall from Sec. 1.3 that when a system at a
                        given initial state goes through a sequence of processes and finally returns to that state, the
                        system has executed a thermodynamic cycle. The study of systems undergoing cycles has
                        played an important role in the development of the subject of engineering thermodynamics.
                        Both the first and second laws of thermodynamics have roots in the study of cycles. In ad-
                        dition, there are many important practical applications involving power generation, vehicle
                        propulsion, and refrigeration for which an understanding of thermodynamic cycles is neces-
                        sary. In this section, cycles are considered from the perspective of the conservation of en-
                        ergy principle. Cycles are studied in greater detail in subsequent chapters, using both the
                        conservation of energy principle and the second law of thermodynamics.

                         2.6.1 Cycle Energy Balance

                        The energy balance for any system undergoing a thermodynamic cycle takes the form

                                                         ˘Ecycle  Qcycle  Wcycle                                        (2.39)

                        where Qcycle and Wcycle represent net amounts of energy transfer by heat and work,
                        respectively, for the cycle. Since the system is returned to its initial state after the cycle,
                                                                          2.6 Energy Analysis of Cycles 59

Hot                                  Hot
body                                 body

                                          Q out

          Q in                       System
System                                         Q in

                Wcycle = Qin ­ Qout                  Wcycle = Qout ­ Qin

     Q out                           Cold
Cold                                 body
body

(a)                                  (b)

 Figure 2.15 Schematic diagrams of two important classes of
cycles. (a) Power cycles. (b) Refrigeration and heat pump cycles.

there is no net change in its energy. Therefore, the left side of Eq. 2.39 equals zero, and the
equation reduces to

                                     Wcycle  Qcycle                       (2.40) 

Equation 2.40 is an expression of the conservation of energy principle that must be satisfied     METHODOLOGY
by every thermodynamic cycle, regardless of the sequence of processes followed by the sys-        UPDATE
tem undergoing the cycle or the nature of the substances making up the system.
                                                                                                  When analyzing cycles,
   Figure 2.15 provides simplified schematics of two general classes of cycles considered in      we normally take energy
this book: power cycles and refrigeration and heat pump cycles. In each case pictured, a sys-     transfers as positive in the
tem undergoes a cycle while communicating thermally with two bodies, one hot and the other        directions of arrows on a
cold. These bodies are systems located in the surroundings of the system undergoing the           sketch of the system and
cycle. During each cycle there is also a net amount of energy exchanged with the surround-        write the energy balance
ings by work. Carefully observe that in using the symbols Qin and Qout on Fig. 2.15 we have       accordingly.
departed from the previously stated sign convention for heat transfer. In this section it is ad-
vantageous to regard Qin and Qout as transfers of energy in the directions indicated by the
arrows. The direction of the net work of the cycle, Wcycle, is also indicated by an arrow.
Finally, note that the directions of the energy transfers shown in Fig. 2.15b are opposite to
those of Fig. 2.15a.

 2.6.2 Power Cycles

Systems undergoing cycles of the type shown in Fig. 2.15a deliver a net work transfer of en-
ergy to their surroundings during each cycle. Any such cycle is called a power cycle. From power cycle
Eq. 2.40, the net work output equals the net heat transfer to the cycle, or

                Wcycle  Qin  Qout 1power cycle2                           (2.41)

where Qin represents the heat transfer of energy into the system from the hot body, and Qout
represents heat transfer out of the system to the cold body. From Eq. 2.41 it is clear that Qin
60 Chapter 2 Energy and the First Law of Thermodynamics

                                must be greater than Qout for a power cycle. The energy supplied by heat transfer to a system
                                undergoing a power cycle is normally derived from the combustion of fuel or a moderated
                                nuclear reaction; it can also be obtained from solar radiation. The energy Qout is generally
                                discharged to the surrounding atmosphere or a nearby body of water.

                                    The performance of a system undergoing a power cycle can be described in terms of the
                                extent to which the energy added by heat, Qin, is converted to a net work output, Wcycle. The
                                extent of the energy conversion from heat to work is expressed by the following ratio, com-
                                monly called the thermal efficiency

thermal efficiency      h  Wcycle   1power cycle2                                                (2.42)
                               Qin

                        Introducing Eq. 2.41, an alternative form is obtained as

                        h  Qin  Qout  1  Qout                                     1power cycle2  (2.43)
                        Qin         Qin

                        Since energy is conserved, it follows that the thermal efficiency can never be greater than
                        unity (100%). However, experience with actual power cycles shows that the value of thermal
                        efficiency is invariably less than unity. That is, not all the energy added to the system by heat
                        transfer is converted to work; a portion is discharged to the cold body by heat transfer. Using
                        the second law of thermodynamics, we will show in Chap. 5 that the conversion from heat
                        to work cannot be fully accomplished by any power cycle. The thermal efficiency of every
                        power cycle must be less than unity:   1.

refrigeration and heat   2.6.3 Refrigeration and Heat Pump Cycles
pump cycles
                        Next, consider the refrigeration and heat pump cycles shown in Fig. 2.15b. For cycles of
                        this type, Qin is the energy transferred by heat into the system undergoing the cycle from the
                        cold body, and Qout is the energy discharged by heat transfer from the system to the hot body.
                        To accomplish these energy transfers requires a net work input, Wcycle. The quantities Qin,
                        Qout, and Wcycle are related by the energy balance, which for refrigeration and heat pump
                        cycles takes the form

                        Wcycle  Qout  Qin 1refrigeration and heat pump cycles2                   (2.44)

                        Since Wcycle is positive in this equation, it follows that Qout is greater than Qin.
                           Although we have treated them as the same to this point, refrigeration and heat pump cy-

                        cles actually have different objectives. The objective of a refrigeration cycle is to cool a re-
                        frigerated space or to maintain the temperature within a dwelling or other building below
                        that of the surroundings. The objective of a heat pump is to maintain the temperature within
                        a dwelling or other building above that of the surroundings or to provide heating for certain
                        industrial processes that occur at elevated temperatures.

                           Since refrigeration and heat pump cycles have different objectives, their performance
                        parameters, called coefficients of performance, are defined differently. These coefficients of
                        performance are considered next.

                        REFRIGERATION CYCLES

                        The performance of refrigeration cycles can be described as the ratio of the amount of
                        energy received by the system undergoing the cycle from the cold body, Qin, to the net
                                                                                                                         2.6 Energy Analysis of Cycles 61

work into the system to accomplish this effect, Wcycle. Thus, the coefficient of perform-
ance, , is

   b  Qin          1refrigeration cycle2                                        coefficient of
         Wcycle                                                      (2.45) performance:

                                                                                refrigeration

Introducing Eq. 2.44, an alternative expression for  is obtained as

b        Qin  Qin  1refrigeration cycle2                             (2.46)
     Qout 

For a household refrigerator, Qout is discharged to the space in which the refrigerator is
located. Wcycle is usually provided in the form of electricity to run the motor that drives the
refrigerator.

    for example. . . in a refrigerator the inside compartment acts as the cold body and
the ambient air surrounding the refrigerator is the hot body. Energy Qin passes to the circu-
lating refrigerant from the food and other contents of the inside compartment. For this heat
transfer to occur, the refrigerant temperature is necessarily below that of the refrigerator con-
tents. Energy Qout passes from the refrigerant to the surrounding air. For this heat transfer to
occur, the temperature of the circulating refrigerant must necessarily be above that of the sur-
rounding air. To achieve these effects, a work input is required. For a refrigerator, Wcycle is
provided in the form of electricity. 

HEAT PUMP CYCLES

The performance of heat pumps can be described as the ratio of the amount of energy
discharged from the system undergoing the cycle to the hot body, Qout, to the net work
into the system to accomplish this effect, Wcycle. Thus, the coefficient of performance,
, is

   g  Qout         1heat pump cycle2                                 (2.47) coefficient of
         Wcycle                                                                 performance: heat pump

Introducing Eq. 2.44, an alternative expression for this coefficient of performance is
obtained as

g        Qout      1heat pump cycle2                                 (2.48)
     Qout  Qin

From this equation it can be seen that the value of  is never less than unity. For residential
heat pumps, the energy quantity Qin is normally drawn from the surrounding atmosphere, the
ground, or a nearby body of water. Wcycle is usually provided by electricity.

   The coefficients of performance  and  are defined as ratios of the desired heat transfer
effect to the cost in terms of work to accomplish that effect. Based on the definitions, it is
desirable thermodynamically that these coefficients have values that are as large as possible.
However, as discussed in Chap. 5, coefficients of performance must satisfy restrictions im-
posed by the second law of thermodynamics.
62 Chapter 2 Energy and the First Law of Thermodynamics

Chapter Summary and Study Guide

In this chapter, we have considered the concept of energy from     for a process of a closed system is Eq. 2.35 and an accom-
an engineering perspective and have introduced energy bal-         panying time rate form is Eq. 2.37. Equation 2.40 is a special
ances for applying the conservation of energy principle to         form of the energy balance for a system undergoing a ther-
closed systems. A basic idea is that energy can be stored within   modynamic cycle.
systems in three macroscopic forms: internal energy, kinetic
energy, and gravitational potential energy. Energy also can be        The following checklist provides a study guide for this
transferred to and from systems.                                   chapter. When your study of the text and end-of-chapter ex-
                                                                   ercises has been completed, you should be able to
   Energy can be transferred to and from closed systems by
two means only: work and heat transfer. Work and heat trans-        write out the meanings of the terms listed in the margins
fer are identified at the system boundary and are not proper-         throughout the chapter and understand each of the related
ties. In mechanics, work is energy transfer associated with           concepts. The subset of key concepts listed below is par-
macroscopic forces and displacements at the system bound-             ticularly important in subsequent chapters.
ary. The thermodynamic definition of work introduced in this
chapter extends the notion of work from mechanics to in-            evaluate these energy quantities
clude other types of work. Energy transfer by heat is due to
a temperature difference between the system and its sur-                 ­kinetic and potential energy changes using Eqs. 2.5
roundings, and occurs in the direction of decreasing temper-               and 2.10, respectively.
ature. Heat transfer modes include conduction, radiation, and            ­work and power using Eqs. 2.12 and 2.13,
convection. These sign conventions are used for work and                   respectively.
heat transfer:                                                           ­expansion or compression work using Eq. 2.17

  W,   #  e  7  0:  work done  by the  system                       apply closed system energy balances in each of several
      W      6  0:  work done  by the  system                         alternative forms, appropriately modeling the case at
                                                                      hand, correctly observing sign conventions for work
       #  e  7  0: heat transfer to the system                        and heat transfer, and carefully applying SI and English
  Q, Q       6  0: heat transfer from the system                      units.

   Energy is an extensive property of a system. Only changes        conduct energy analyses for systems undergoing
in the energy of a system have significance. Energy changes           thermodynamic cycles using Eq. 2.40, and evaluating,
are accounted for by the energy balance. The energy balance           as appropriate, the thermal efficiencies of power cycles
                                                                      and coefficients of performance of refrigeration and heat
                                                                      pump cycles.

Key Engineering Concepts

kinetic energy p. 30           internal energy p. 43               energy balance p. 48  refrigeration cycle p. 60
potential energy p. 32         heat transfer p. 44                 power cycle p. 59     heat pump cycle
work p. 33                     first law of
power p. 35                                                                                 p. 60­61
                                  thermodynamics p. 48

Exercises: Things Engineers Think About

1. What forces act on the bicyle and rider considered in Sec.      5. List examples of heat transfer by conduction, radiation, and
2.2.2? Sketch a free body diagram.                                 convection you might find in a kitchen.

2. Why is it incorrect to say that a system contains heat?         6. When a falling object impacts the earth and comes to rest,
                                                                   what happens to its kinetic and potential energies?
3. An ice skater blows into cupped hands to warm them, yet at
lunch blows across a bowl of soup to cool it. How can this be in-  7. When you stir a cup of coffee, what happens to the energy
terpreted thermodynamically?                                       transferred to the coffee by work?

4. Sketch the steady-state temperature distribution for a furnace  8. What energy transfers by work and heat can you identify for
wall composed of an 8-inch-thick concrete inner layer and a 1/2-   a moving automobile?
inch-thick steel outer layer.
                                                                      Problems: Developing Engineering Skills 63

9. Why are the symbols U, KE, and PE used to denote the               12. What form does the energy balance take for an isolated sys-
energy change during a process, but the work and heat transfer        tem? Interpret the expression you obtain.
for the process represented, respectively, simply as W and Q?
                                                                      13. How would you define an appropriate efficiency for the gear-
10. If the change in energy of a closed system is known for a         box of Example 2.4?
process between two end states, can you determine if the energy
change was due to work, to heat transfer, or to some combina-         14. Two power cycles each receive the same energy input Qin
tion of work and heat transfer?                                       and discharge energy Qout to the same lake. If the cycles have
                                                                      different thermal efficiencies, which discharges the greater
11. Referring to Fig. 2.8, can you tell which process, A or B, has    amount Qout? Does this have any implications for the environ-
the greater heat transfer?                                            ment?

Problems: Developing Engineering Skills

Applying Energy Concepts from Mechanics                                  (b) For a steel flywheel rotating at 3000 RPM, determine the
                                                                              kinetic energy, in N # m, and the mass, in kg, if R  0.38 m
2.1 An automobile has a mass of 1200 kg. What is its kinetic                  and w  0.025 m.
   energy, in kJ, relative to the road when traveling at a velocity
   of 50 km/h? If the vehicle accelerates to 100 km/h, what is the       (c) Determine the radius, in m, and the mass, in kg, of an alu-
   change in kinetic energy, in kJ?                                          minum flywheel having the same width, angular velocity,
                                                                             and kinetic energy as in part (b).
2.2 An object whose mass is 400 kg is located at an elevation
   of 25 m above the surface of the earth. For g  9.78 m /s2, de-     2.8 Two objects having different masses fall freely under the
   termine the gravitational potential energy of the object, in kJ,      influence of gravity from rest and the same initial elevation.
   relative to the surface of the earth.                                 Ignoring the effect of air resistance, show that the magnitudes
                                                                         of the velocities of the objects are equal at the moment just
2.3 An object of mass 1000 kg, initially having a velocity of            before they strike the earth.
   100 m /s, decelerates to a final velocity of 20 m/s. What is the
   change in kinetic energy of the object, in kJ?                     2.9 An object whose mass is 25 kg is projected upward from
                                                                         the surface of the earth with an initial velocity of 60 m/s. The
2.4 An airplane whose mass is 5000 kg is flying with a veloc-            only force acting on the object is the force of gravity. Plot the
   ity of 150 m/s at an altitude of 10,000 m, both measured rel-         velocity of the object versus elevation. Determine the eleva-
   ative to the surface of the earth. The acceleration of gravity        tion of the object, in ft, when its velocity reaches zero. The ac-
   can be taken as constant at g  9.78 m /s2.                            celeration of gravity is g  9.8 m/s2.

   (a) Calculate the kinetic and potential energies of the airplane,  2.10 A block of mass 10 kg moves along a surface inclined
        both in kJ.                                                      30 relative to the horizontal. The center of gravity of the
                                                                         block is elevated by 3.0 m and the kinetic energy of the block
   (b) If the kinetic energy increased by 10,000 kJ with no change       decreases by 50 J. The block is acted upon by a constant
        in elevation, what would be the final velocity, in m/s?          force R parallel to the incline and by the force of gravity.
                                                                         Assume frictionless surfaces and let g  9.81 m/s2. Deter-
2.5 An object whose mass is 0.5 kg has a velocity of 30 m/s.             mine the magnitude and direction of the constant force R,
   Determine                                                             in N.

   (a) the final velocity, in m/s, if the kinetic energy of the ob-   2.11 Beginning from rest, an object of mass 200 kg slides
        ject decreases by 130 J.                                         down a 10-m-long ramp. The ramp is inclined at an angle of
                                                                         40 from the horizontal. If air resistance and friction between
   (b) the change in elevation, in ft, associated with a 130 J           the object and the ramp are negligible, determine the veloc-
        change in potential energy. Let g  9.81 m/s2.                    ity of the object, in m/s, at the bottom of the ramp. Let g 
                                                                         9.81 m /s2.
2.6 An object whose mass is 2 kg is accelerated from a veloc-
   ity of 200 m/s to a final velocity of 500 m/s by the action of     Evaluating Work
   a resultant force. Determine the work done by the resultant
   force, in kJ, if there are no other interactions between the ob-   2.12 A system with a mass of 5 kg, initially moving horizon-
   ject and its surroundings.                                            tally with a velocity of 40 m/s, experiences a constant hori-
                                                                         zontal deceleration of 2 m /s2 due to the action of a resultant
2.7 A disk-shaped flywheel, of uniform density , outer ra-               force. As a result, the system comes to rest. Determine the
   dius R, and thickness w, rotates with an angular velocity ,           length of time, in s, the force is applied and the amount of
   in rad/s.                                                             energy transfer by work, in kJ.

  (a) Show that the moment of inertia, I  vol rr2 dV, can be
        expressed as I  wR 42 and the kinetic energy can be
        expressed as KE  I22.
64 Chapter 2 Energy and the First Law of Thermodynamics

2.13 The drag force, Fd, imposed by the surrounding air on a             varies linearly from an initial value of 900 N to a final value
   vehicle moving with velocity V is given by                            of zero. The atmospheric pressure is 100 kPa, and the area
                                                                         of the piston face is 0.018 m2. Friction between the piston
                              Fd  CdA21rV2                               and the cylinder wall can be neglected. For the air, determine
                                                                         the initial and final pressures, in kPa, and the work, in kJ.
   where Cd is a constant called the drag coefficient, A is the pro-
   jected frontal area of the vehicle, and  is the air density. De-          A = 0.018 m2
   termine the power, in kW, required to overcome aerodynamic
   drag for a truck moving at 110 km/h, if Cd  0.65, A  10 m2,                                                         patm = 100 kPa
   and   1.1 kg/m3.
                                                                                Air
2.14 A major force opposing the motion of a vehicle is the
   rolling resistance of the tires, Fr, given by                                                       Spring force varies linearly from 900 N when
                                                                                                         V1 = 0.003 m3 to zero when V2 = 0.002 m3
                                 Fr  f w
                                                                       Figure P2.19
   where f is a constant called the rolling resistance coefficient
   and w is the vehicle weight. Determine the power, in kW,           2.20 Air undergoes two processes in series:
   required to overcome rolling resistance for a truck weighing
   322.5 kN that is moving at 110 km /h. Let f  0.0069.               Process 1­2: polytropic compression, with n  1.3, from p1 
                                                                            100 kPa, v1  0.04 m3/kg to v2  0.02 m3/kg
2.15 Measured data for pressure versus volume during the ex-
   pansion of gases within the cylinder of an internal combustion     Process 2­3: constant-pressure process to v3  v1
   engine are given in the table below. Using data from the table,
   complete the following:                                               Sketch the processes on a pv diagram and determine the work
                                                                         per unit mass of air, in kJ/kg.
   (a) Determine a value of n such that the data are fit by an        2.21 For the cycle of Problem 1.25, determine the work for each
        equation of the form, pVn  constant.                             process and the net work for the cycle, each in kJ.
                                                                      2.22 The driveshaft of a building's air-handling fan is turned at
   (b) Evaluate analytically the work done by the gases, in kJ,          300 RPM by a belt running on a 0.3-m-diameter pulley. The
        using Eq. 2.17 along with the result of part (a).                net force applied by the belt on the pulley is 2000 N. Deter-
                                                                         mine the torque applied by the belt on the pulley, in N # m, and
   (c) Using graphical or numerical integration of the data, eval-       the power transmitted, in kW.
       uate the work done by the gases, in kJ.                        2.23 An electric motor draws a current of 10 amp with a voltage
                                                                         of 110 V. The output shaft develops a torque of 10.2 N # m and
   (d) Compare the different methods for estimating the work             a rotational speed of 1000 RPM. For operation at steady state,
        used in parts (b) and (c). Why are they estimates?               determine

Data Point  p (bar)  V (cm3)                                             (a) the electric power required by the motor and the power de-
                                                                              veloped by the output shaft, each in kW.
     1        15        300
     2        12        361                                              (b) the net power input to the motor, in kW.
     3          9       459                                              (c) the amount of energy transferred to the motor by electri-
     4          6       644
     5          4       903                                                   cal work and the amount of energy transferred out of the
     6          2     1608                                                    motor by the shaft, in kW # h during 2 h of operation.
                                                                      2.24 A 12-V automotive storage battery is charged with a con-
2.16 One-fourth kg of a gas contained within a piston­cylinder           stant current of 2 amp for 24 h. If electricity costs $0.08 per
                                                                         kW # h, determine the cost of recharging the battery.
   assembly undergoes a constant-pressure process at 5 bar be-        2.25 For your lifestyle, estimate the monthly cost of operating
   ginning at v1  0.20 m3/kg. For the gas as the system, the work        the following household items: microwave oven, refrigerator,
   is 15 kJ. Determine the final volume of the gas, in m3.               electric space heater, personal computer, hand-held hair drier,
                                                                         a 100-W light bulb. Assume the cost of electricity is $0.08 per
2.17 A gas is compressed from V1  0.3 m3, p1  1 bar to                   kW # h.
   V2  0.1 m3, p2  3 bar. Pressure and volume are related lin-        2.26 A solid cylindrical bar (see Fig. 2.9) of diameter 5 mm is
   early during the process. For the gas, find the work, in kJ.          slowly stretched from an initial length of 10 cm to a final length
                                                                         of 10.1 cm. The normal stress in the bar varies according to
2.18 A gas expands from an initial state where p1  500 kPa                 C(x  x0)x0, where x is the length of the bar, x0 is the
   and V1  0.1 m3 to a final state where p2  100 kPa. The                initial length, and C is a material constant (Young's modulus).
   relationship between pressure and volume during the process
   is pV  constant. Sketch the process on a p­V diagram and
   determine the work, in kJ.

2.19 Warm air is contained in a piston­cylinder assembly ori-

   ented horizontally as shown in Fig. P2.19. The air cools
   slowly from an initial volume of 0.003 m3 to a final volume
   of 0.002 m3. During the process, the spring exerts a force that
                                                                                     Problems: Developing Engineering Skills 65

   For C  2  107 kPa, determine the work done on the bar, in         2.35 A closed system of mass 5 kg undergoes a process in which
   J, assuming the diameter remains constant.                           there is work of magnitude 9 kJ to the system from the sur-
                                                                        roundings. The elevation of the system increases by 700 m
2.27 A wire of cross-sectional area A and initial length x0 is          during the process. The specific internal energy of the system
   stretched. The normal stress  acting in the wire varies linearly     decreases by 6 kJ/kg and there is no change in kinetic energy
   with strain, , where                                                 of the system. The acceleration of gravity is constant at g  9.6
                                                                        m /s2. Determine the heat transfer, in kJ.
                      e  1x  x02x0
                                                                     2.36 A closed system of mass 20 kg undergoes a process in
   and x is the length of the wire. Assuming the cross-sectional        which there is a heat transfer of 1000 kJ from the system to
   area remains constant, derive an expression for the work done        the surroundings. The work done on the system is 200 kJ. If
   on the wire as a function of strain.                                 the initial specific internal energy of the system is 300 kJ/kg,
                                                                        what is the final specific internal energy, in kJ/kg? Neglect
2.28 A soap film is suspended on a 5 cm  5 cm wire frame,               changes in kinetic and potential energy.
   as shown in Fig. 2.10. The movable wire is displaced 1 cm by
   an applied force, while the surface tension of the soap film      2.37 As shown in Fig. P2.37, 5 kg of steam contained within
   remains constant at 25  105 N/cm. Determine the work done            a piston­cylinder assembly undergoes an expansion from state
   in stretching the film, in J.                                        1, where the specific internal energy is u1  2709.9 kJ/kg,
                                                                        to state 2, where u2  2659.6 kJ/kg. During the process, there
2.29 Derive an expression to estimate the work required to              is heat transfer to the steam with a magnitude of 80 kJ. Also,
   inflate a common balloon. List all simplifying assumptions.          a paddle wheel transfers energy to the steam by work in the
                                                                        amount of 18.5 kJ. There is no significant change in the
Evaluating Heat Transfer                                                kinetic or potential energy of the steam. Determine the en-
                                                                        ergy transfer by work from the steam to the piston during
2.30 A 0.2-m-thick plane wall is constructed of concrete. At            the process, in kJ.
   steady state, the energy transfer rate by conduction through a
   1-m2 area of the wall is 0.15 kW. If the temperature distribu-                                5 kg of
   tion is linear through the wall, what is the temperature differ-                              steam
   ence across the wall, in K?
                                                                                                             Wpiston = ?
2.31 A 2-cm-diameter surface at 1000 K emits thermal radia-
   tion at a rate of 15 W. What is the emissivity of the surface?    Wpw = ­18.5 kJ
   Assuming constant emissivity, plot the rate of radiant emis-
   sion, in W, for surface temperatures ranging from 0 to 2000 K.                    Q = +80 kJ           u1 = 2709.9 kJ/kg
   The Stefan­Boltzmann constant, , is 5.67  108 W/m2 # K4.                                               u2 = 2659.6 kJ/kg

2.32 A flat surface having an area of 2 m2 and a temperature          Figure P2.37
   of 350 K is cooled convectively by a gas at 300 K. Using data
   from Table 2.1, determine the largest and smallest heat trans-    2.38 An electric generator coupled to a windmill produces an
  fer rates, in kW, that might be encountered for (a) free con-         average electric power output of 15 kW. The power is used to
  vection, (b) forced convection.                                       charge a storage battery. Heat transfer from the battery to the
                                                                        surroundings occurs at a constant rate of 1.8 kW. Determine,
2.33 A flat surface is covered with insulation with a thermal           for 8 h of operation
   conductivity of 0.08 W/m # K. The temperature at the interface
   between the surface and the insulation is 300C. The outside          (a) the total amount of energy stored in the battery, in kJ.
   of the insulation is exposed to air at 30C, and the heat trans-      (b) the value of the stored energy, in $, if electricity is valued
   fer coefficient for convection between the insulation and the
   air is 10 W/m2 # K. Ignoring radiation, determine the minimum             at $0.08 per kW # h.
   thickness of insulation, in m, such that the outside of the in-
   sulation is no hotter than 60C at steady state.                   2.39 A closed system undergoes a process during which there
                                                                        is energy transfer from the system by heat at a constant rate of
Using the Energy Balance                                                10 kW, and the power varies with time according to

2.34 Each line in the following table gives information about a
   process of a closed system. Every entry has the same energy
   units. Fill in the blank spaces in the table.

Process  Q   W   E1  E2  E

a        50 20       50

b        50 20 20

c        40          60  20                                                           #    e  8t  0 6 t1h
                                                                                     W        8   t 7 1h
d            90      50     0

e        50      20      100                                                                          #
                                                                     where t is time, in h, and W is in kW.
66 Chapter 2 Energy and the First Law of Thermodynamics

   (a) What is the time rate of change of system energy at t             2.46 A gas contained within a piston­cylinder assembly is
        0.6 h, in kW?                                                       shown in Fig. P2.46. Initially, the piston face is at x  0, and
                                                                            the spring exerts no force on the piston. As a result of heat
   (b) Determine the change in system energy after 2 h, in kJ.              transfer, the gas expands, raising the piston until it hits the
                                                                            stops. At this point the piston face is located at x 
2.40 A storage battery develops a power output of                           0.06 m, and the heat transfer ceases. The force exerted by the
                            #                                               spring on the piston as the gas expands varies linearly with
                                                                            x according to
                    W  1.2 exp1t602
                                                                                                         Fspring  kx
             #
   where W is power, in kW, and t is time, in s. Ignoring heat              where k  9,000 N/m. Friction between the piston and the
   transfer                                                                 cylinder wall can be neglected. The acceleration of gravity
                                                                            is g  9.81 m/s2. Additional information is given on
   (a) plot the power output, in kW, and the change in energy of            Fig. P2.70.
        the battery, in kJ, each as a function of time.
                                                                                       patm = 1 bar
   (b) What are the limiting values for the power output and the                      Apist = 0.0078 m2
        change in energy of the battery as t S ? Discuss.                             mpist = 10 kg

2.41 A gas expands in a piston­cylinder assembly from p1  8                       x=0
   bar, V1  0.02 m3 to p2  2 bar in a process during which the
   relation between pressure and volume is pV1.2  constant. The                              Gas
   mass of the gas is 0.25 kg. If the specific internal energy of                                  mgas = 0.5 g
   the gas decreases by 55 kJ/kg during the process, determine
   the heat transfer, in kJ. Kinetic and potential energy effects are          Figure P2.46
   negligible.
                                                                         (a) What is the initial pressure of the gas, in kPa?
2.42 Two kilograms of air is contained in a rigid well-insulated         (b) Determine the work done by the gas on the piston, in J.
   tank with a volume of 0.6 m3. The tank is fitted with a paddle        (c) If the specific internal energies of the gas at the initial and
   wheel that transfers energy to the air at a constant rate of 10 W
   for 1 h. If no changes in kinetic or potential energy occur,              final states are 210 and 335 kJ/kg, respectively, calculate
   determine                                                                 the heat transfer, in J.

   (a) the specific volume at the final state, in m3/kg.                 Analyzing Thermodynamic Cycles
   (b) the energy transfer by work, in kJ.
   (c) the change in specific internal energy of the air, in kJ/kg.      2.47 The following table gives data, in kJ, for a system under-
                                                                            going a thermodynamic cycle consisting of four processes in
2.43 A gas is contained in a closed rigid tank. An electric                 series. For the cycle, kinetic and potential energy effects can
   resistor in the tank transfers energy to the gas at a constant rate      be neglected. Determine
   of 1000 W. Heat transfe#r between the gas #and the surround-
   ings occurs at a rate of Q  50t, where Q is in watts, and t              (a) the missing table entries, each in kJ.
   is time, in min.                                                         (b) whether the cycle is a power cycle or a refrigeration

   (a) Plot the time rate of change of energy of the gas for                     cycle.
        0  t  20 min, in watts.
                                                                         Process       U     Q                   W
   (b) Determine the net change in energy of the gas after 20
        min, in kJ.                                                      1­2           600                       600

   (c) If electricity is valued at $0.08 per kW # h, what is the cost    2­3                                     1300
       of the electrical input to the resistor for 20 min of operation?
                                                                         3­4           700   0
2.44 Steam in a piston­cylinder assembly undergoes a poly-
   tropic process, with n  2, from an initial state where p1  3.45       4­1                 500                 700
   MPa, v1  .106 m3/kg, u1  3171 kJ/kg to a final state where
   u2  2304 kJ/kg. During the process, there is a heat transfer
   from the steam of magnitude 361.8. The mass of steam is .544 kg.
   Neglecting changes in kinetic and potential energy, determine the
   work, in kJ.

2.45 Air is contained in a vertical piston­cylinder assembly
   by a piston of mass 50 kg and having a face area of 0.01 m2.
   The mass of the air is 5 g, and initially the air occupies a
   volume of 5 liters. The atmosphere exerts a pressure of 100
   kPa on the top of the piston. The volume of the air slowly
   decreases to 0.002 m3 as the specific internal energy of the
   air decreases by 260 kJ/kg. Neglecting friction between the
   piston and the cylinder wall, determine the heat transfer to
   the air, in kJ.
Design & Open Ended Problems: Exploring Engineering Practice 67

2.48 A gas undergoes a thermodynamic cycle consisting of             2.53 A power cycle has a thermal efficiency of 35% and gen-
   three processes:                                                     erates electricity at a rate of 100 MW. The electricity is val-
                                                                        ued at $0# .08 per kW # h. Based on the cost of fuel, the cost to
Process 1­2: compression with pV  constant, from p1  1                  supply Qin is $4.50 per GJ. For 8000 hours of operation an-
      bar, V1  1.6 m3 to V2  0.2 m3, U2  U1  0                          nually, determine, in $,

Process 2­3: constant pressure to V3  V1                                (a) the value of the electricity generated per year.
Process 3­1: constant volume, U1  U3  3549 kJ                           (b) the annual fuel cost.

   There are no significant changes in kinetic or potential energy.  2.54 For each of the following, what plays the roles of the hot
   Determine the heat transfer and work for Process 2­3, in kJ.         body and the cold body of the appropriate Fig. 2.15
   Is this a power cycle or a refrigeration cycle?                      schematic?

2.49 A gas undergoes a thermodynamic cycle consisting of                (a) Window air conditioner
   three processes:                                                     (b) Nuclear submarine power plant
                                                                        (c) Ground-source heat pump
Process 1­2: constant volume, V  0.028 m3, U2  U1 
      26.4 kJ                                                        2.55 In what ways do automobile engines operate analogously
                                                                        to the power cycle shown in Fig. 2.15a? How are they differ-
Process 2­3: expansion with pV  constant, U3  U2                        ent? Discuss.
Process 3­1: constant pressure, p  1.4 bar, W31  10.5 kJ
                                                                     2.56 A refrigeration cycle operating as shown in Fig. 2.15b has
   There are no significant changes in kinetic or potential energy.     heat transfer Qout  2530 kJ and net work of Wcycle  844 kJ.
                                                                        Determine the coefficient of performance for the cycle.
   (a) Sketch the cycle on a p­V diagram.
   (b) Calculate the net work for the cycle, in kJ.                  2.57 A refrigeration cycle operates as shown in Fig. 2.15b with
   (c) Calculate the heat transfer for process 2­3, in kJ.              a coefficient of performance   1.5. For the cycle, Qout 
   (d) Calculate the heat transfer for process 3­1, in kJ.              500 kJ. Determine Qin and Wcycle, each in kJ.

   Is this a power cycle or a refrigeration cycle?                   2.58 A refrigeration cycle operates continuously and removes en-
                                                                        ergy from the refrigerated space at a rate of 3.5 kW. For a coef-
2.50 For a power cycle operating as in Fig. 2.15a, the heat trans-      ficient of performance of 2.6, determine the net power required.
   fers are Qin  50 kJ and Qout  35 kJ. Determine the net work,
   in kJ, and the thermal efficiency.                                2.59 A heat pump cycle whose coefficient of performance is
                                                                        2.5 delivers energy by heat transfer to a dwelling at a rate of
2.51 The thermal efficiency of a power cycle operating as               20 kW.
   shown in Fig. 2.15a is 35%, and Qout  40 MJ. Determine the
   net work developed and the heat transfer Qin, each in MJ.            (a) Determine the net power required to operate the heat pump,
                                                                             in kW.
2.52 A power cycle receives energy by heat transfer from the
   combustion of fuel at a rate of 300 MW. The thermal efficiency       (b) Evaluating electricity at $0.08 per kW # h, determine the
   of the cycle is 33.3%.                                                    cost of electricity in a month when the heat pump oper-
                                                                             ates for 200 hours.
   (a) Determine the net rate power is developed, in MW.
   (b) For 8000 hours of operation annually, determine the net       2.60 A household refrigerator with a coefficient of performance
                                                                        of 2.4 removes energy from the refrigerated space at a rate of
        work output, in kW # h per year.                                200 W. Evaluating electricity at $0.08 per kW # h, determine
   (c) Evaluating the net work output at $0.08 per kW # h, deter-       the cost of electricity in a month when the refrigerator oper-
                                                                        ates for 360 hours.
       mine the value of the net work, in $/year.

Design & Open Ended Problems: Exploring Engineering Practice

2.1D The effective use of our energy resources is an important               the extent to which these renewable resources are
   societal goal.                                                            utilized.

   (a) Summarize in a pie chart the data on the use of fuels in      2.2D Among several engineers and scientists who contributed
        your state in the residential, commercial, industrial, and      to the development of the first law of thermodynamics are:
        transportation sectors. What factors may affect the future
        availability of these fuels? Does your state have a written     (a) James Joule.
        energy policy? Discuss.                                         (b) James Watt.
                                                                        (c) Benjamin Thompson (Count Rumford).
   (b) Determine the present uses of solar energy, hydropower,          (d) Sir Humphrey Davy.
        and wind energy in your area. Discuss factors that affect       (e) Julius Robert Mayer.
68 Chapter 2 Energy and the First Law of Thermodynamics

   Write a biographical sketch of one of them, including a de-            such bottles and explain the basic principles that make them
   scription of his principal contributions to the first law.             effective.

2.3D Specially designed flywheels have been used by electric           2.8D A brief discussion of power, refrigeration, and heat pump
   utilities to store electricity. Automotive applications of fly-        cycles is presented in this chapter. For one, or more, of the
   wheel energy storage also have been proposed. Write a report           applications listed below, explain the operating principles and
   that discusses promising uses of flywheels for energy storage,         discuss the significant energy transfers and environmental
   including consideration of flywheel materials, their properties,       impacts:
   and costs.
                                                                          (a) coal-fired power plant.
2.4D Develop a list of the most common home-heating options               (b) nuclear power plant.
   in your locale. For a 2500-ft2 dwelling, what is the annual fuel       (c) refrigeration unit supplying chilled water to the cooling
   cost or electricity cost for each option listed? Also, what is the
   installed cost of each option? For a 15-year life, which option            system of a large building.
   is the most economical?                                                (d) heat pump for residential heating and air conditioning.
                                                                          (e) automobile air conditioning unit
2.5D The overall convective heat transfer coefficient is used
   in the analysis of heat exchangers (Sec. 4.3) to relate the over-   2.9D Fossil-fuel power plants produce most of the electricity
   all heat transfer rate and the log mean temperature difference         generated annually in the United States. The cost of electric-
   between the two fluids passing through the heat exchanger.             ity is determined by several factors, including the power plant
   Write a memorandum explaining these concepts. Include data             thermal efficiency, the unit cost of the fuel, in $ per kW # h,
   from the engineering literature on characteristic values of the        and the plant capital cost, in $ per kW of power generated.
   overall convective heat transfer coefficient for the following         Prepare a memorandum comparing typical ranges of these
   heat exchanger applications: air-to-air heat recovery, air-            three factors for coal-fired steam power plants and natural
   to-refrigerant evaporators, shell-and-tube steam condensers.           gas­fired gas turbine power plants. Which type of plant is most
                                                                          prevalent in the United States?
2.6D The outside surfaces of small gasoline engines are often
   covered with fins that enhance the heat transfer between the        2.10D Lightweight, portable refrigerated chests are available
   hot surface and the surrounding air. Larger engines, like auto-        for keeping food cool. These units use a thermoelectric cool-
   mobile engines, have a liquid coolant flowing through passages         ing module energized by plugging the unit into an automobile
   in the engine block. The coolant then passes through the radi-         cigarette lighter. Thermoelectric cooling requires no moving
   ator (a finned-tube heat exchanger) where the needed cooling           parts and requires no refrigerant. Write a report that explains
   is provided by the air flowing through the radiator. Consider-         this thermoelectric refrigeration technology. Discuss the
   ing appropriate data for heat transfer coefficients, engine size,      applicability of this technology to larger-scale refrigeration
   and other design issues related to engine cooling, explain why         systems.
   some engines use liquid coolants and others do not.
                                                                       2.11D Hybrids Harvest Energy (see box Sec. 2.1). Critically
2.7D Common vacuum-type thermos bottles can keep bever-                   compare and evaluate the various hybrid electric vehicles
   ages hot or cold for many hours. Describe the construction of          on the market today. Write a report including at least three
                                                                          references.
Evaluating  C
Properties  H
            A
            P
            T

            3 E

            R

E N G I N E E R I N G C O N T E X T To apply the energy balance to a sys-                           chapter objective
tem of interest requires knowledge of the properties of the system and how the properties
are related. The objective of this chapter is to introduce property relations relevant to en-
gineering thermodynamics. As part of the presentation, several examples are provided that
illustrate the use of the closed system energy balance introduced in Chap. 2 together with
the property relations considered in this chapter.

3.1 Fixing the State                                                                               state principle

The state of a closed system at equilibrium is its condition as described by the values of its     simple compressible
thermodynamic properties. From observation of many thermodynamic systems, it is known              systems
that not all of these properties are independent of one another, and the state can be uniquely
determined by giving the values of the independent properties. Values for all other thermo-
dynamic properties are determined once this independent subset is specified. A general rule
known as the state principle has been developed as a guide in determining the number of in-
dependent properties required to fix the state of a system.

    For most applications considered in this book, we are interested in what the state princi-
ple says about the intensive states of systems. Of particular interest are systems of commonly
encountered pure substances, such as water or a uniform mixture of nonreacting gases. These
systems are classed as simple compressible systems. Experience shows that the simple com-
pressible systems model is useful for a wide range of engineering applications. For such sys-
tems, the state principle indicates that the number of independent intensive properties is two.

 for example. . . in the case of a gas, temperature and another intensive property such
as a specific volume might be selected as the two independent properties. The state princi-
ple then affirms that pressure, specific internal energy, and all other pertinent intensive prop-
erties could be determined as functions of T and v: p  p(T, v), u  u(T, v), and so on. The
functional relations would be developed using experimental data and would depend explic-
itly on the particular chemical identity of the substances making up the system. The devel-
opment of such functions is discussed in Chap. 11. 

   Intensive properties such as velocity and elevation that are assigned values relative to
datums outside the system are excluded from present considerations. Also, as suggested by
the name, changes in volume can have a significant influence on the energy of simple

                                                                                                                        69
70 Chapter 3 Evaluating Properties

simple system  compressible systems. The only mode of energy transfer by work that can occur as a simple
               compressible system undergoes quasiequilibrium processes, is associated with volume change
               and is given by  p dV.

                  To provide a foundation for subsequent developments involving property relations, we
               conclude this introduction with more detailed considerations of the state principle and sim-
               ple compressible system concepts. Based on considerable empirical evidence, it has been
               concluded that there is one independent property for each way a system's energy can be var-
               ied independently. We saw in Chap. 2 that the energy of a closed system can be altered in-
               dependently by heat or by work. Accordingly, an independent property can be associated
               with heat transfer as one way of varying the energy, and another independent property can
               be counted for each relevant way the energy can be changed through work. On the basis of
               experimental evidence, therefore, the state principle asserts that the number of independent
               properties is one plus the number of relevant work interactions. When counting the number
               of relevant work interactions, it suffices to consider only those that would be significant in
               quasiequilibrium processes of the system.

                  The term simple system is applied when there is only one way the system energy can be
               significantly altered by work as the system undergoes quasiequilibrium processes. Therefore,
               counting one independent property for heat transfer and another for the single work mode
               gives a total of two independent properties needed to fix the state of a simple system. This
               is the state principle for simple systems. Although no system is ever truly simple, many
               systems can be modeled as simple systems for the purpose of thermodynamic analysis.
               The most important of these models for the applications considered in this book is the
               simple compressible system. Other types of simple systems are simple elastic systems and
               simple magnetic systems.

p­v­T surface     EVALUATING PROPERTIES:
                  GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS

               This part of the chapter is concerned generally with the thermodynamic properties of sim-
               ple compressible systems consisting of pure substances. A pure substance is one of uniform
               and invariable chemical composition. Property relations for systems in which composition
               changes by chemical reaction are considered in Chap. 13. In the second part of this chapter,
               we consider property evaluation using the ideal gas model.

               3.2 p­v­T Relation

               We begin our study of the properties of pure, simple compressible substances and the rela-
               tions among these properties with pressure, specific volume, and temperature. From experi-
               ment it is known that temperature and specific volume can be regarded as independent and
               pressure determined as a function of these two: p  p(T, v). The graph of such a function
               is a surface, the p­v­T surface.

                3.2.1 p­v­T Surface

               Figure 3.1 is the p­v­T surface of a substance such as water that expands on freezing.
               Figure 3.2 is for a substance that contracts on freezing, and most substances exhibit this char-
               acteristic. The coordinates of a point on the p­v­T surfaces represent the values that pressure,
               specific volume, and temperature would assume when the substance is at equilibrium.
                                                                                                              3.2 p­v­T Relation 71

                                     Liquid

                 Pressure                                    Critical
                                                             point

                           Solid     TriplLeiqlviunaipedo-r

                                      Solid-vapor            Vapor     Tc
                                     volume
                           Specific                          Temperature

                                                   (a)

                                                                       Solid

          SL                                                                               Critical
                                                                                           point

Pressure  Solid           Critical                           Pressure
                 Liquid point

                      L                                                       Liquid-                 T > Tc
                        V Vapor                                                vapor                  Tc
                                                                                                      T < Tc
          S Triple point                                                      Triple line      Vapor
           V
                                                                              Solid-vapor

                 Temperature                                                  Specific volume
                      (b)                                                             (c)

 Figure 3.1 p­v­T surface and projections for a substance that expands on freez-
ing. (a) Three-dimensional view. (b) Phase diagram. (c) p­v diagram.

   There are regions on the p­v­T surfaces of Figs. 3.1 and 3.2 labeled solid, liquid, and                    two-phase regions
vapor. In these single-phase regions, the state is fixed by any two of the properties: pressure,
specific volume, and temperature, since all of these are independent when there is a single                   triple line
phase present. Located between the single-phase regions are two-phase regions where two                       saturation state
phases exist in equilibrium: liquid­vapor, solid­liquid, and solid­vapor. Two phases can co-                  vapor dome
exist during changes in phase such as vaporization, melting, and sublimation. Within the two-                 critical point
phase regions pressure and temperature are not independent; one cannot be changed without
changing the other. In these regions the state cannot be fixed by temperature and pressure
alone; however, the state can be fixed by specific volume and either pressure or temperature.
Three phases can exist in equilibrium along the line labeled triple line.

   A state at which a phase change begins or ends is called a saturation state. The dome-
shaped region composed of the two-phase liquid­vapor states is called the vapor dome. The
lines bordering the vapor dome are called saturated liquid and saturated vapor lines. At the
top of the dome, where the saturated liquid and saturated vapor lines meet, is the critical
point. The critical temperature Tc of a pure substance is the maximum temperature at which
liquid and vapor phases can coexist in equilibrium. The pressure at the critical point is called
72 Chapter 3 Evaluating Properties

                                         Solid                          Liquid
                                    Pressure
                                                          Solid-Liquid          Critical                 Constant-
                                                                                point                    pressure line

                                                        Solid-vapor             Vapor
                                                        volume
                                    Specific                                                Temperature  Tc

                                                                        (a)

               Pressure             S
                                                                  PressureL

                                                                           Solid                         Critical
                                                                              Solid-liquid               point
               Solid                     Liquid

                                                Critical
                                                  point

                                                   L    Vapor                                   Liquid-                T > Tc
                                                                                                 vapor
                                                     V                                         Triple line   Vapor Tc
                                                                                                                       T < Tc
                                    S Triple point                                             Solid-vapor
                                     V                                                      Specific volume

                                        Temperature

                                    (b)                                                     (c)

                Figure 3.2 p­v­T surface and projections for a substance that contracts
               on freezing. (a) Three-dimensional view. (b) Phase diagram. (c) p­v diagram.

phase diagram  the critical pressure, pc. The specific volume at this state is the critical specific volume. Values
               of the critical point properties for a number of substances are given in Tables A-1 located in
               the Appendix.

                  The three-dimensional p­v­T surface is useful for bringing out the general relationships
               among the three phases of matter normally under consideration. However, it is often more
               convenient to work with two-dimensional projections of the surface. These projections are
               considered next.

                3.2.2 Projections of the p­v­T Surface

               THE PHASE DIAGRAM

               If the p­v­T surface is projected onto the pressure­temperature plane, a property diagram
               known as a phase diagram results. As illustrated by Figs. 3.1b and 3.2b, when the surface
               is projected in this way, the two-phase regions reduce to lines. A point on any of these lines
               represents all two-phase mixtures at that particular temperature and pressure.
                                                                                                           3.2 p­v­T Relation 73

   The term saturation temperature designates the temperature at which a phase change                      saturation temperature
takes place at a given pressure, and this pressure is called the saturation pressure for the               saturation pressure
given temperature. It is apparent from the phase diagrams that for each saturation pressure
there is a unique saturation temperature, and conversely.                                                  triple point

   The triple line of the three-dimensional p­v­T surface projects onto a point on the phase
diagram. This is called the triple point. Recall that the triple point of water is used as a ref-
erence in defining temperature scales (Sec. 1.6). By agreement, the temperature assigned to
the triple point of water is 273.16 K. The measured pressure at the triple point of water is
0.6113 kPa.

   The line representing the two-phase solid­liquid region on the phase diagram slopes to
the left for substances that expand on freezing and to the right for those that contract. Al-
though a single solid phase region is shown on the phase diagrams of Figs. 3.1 and 3.2, solids
can exist in different solid phases. For example, seven different crystalline forms have been
identified for water as a solid (ice).

p­ v DIAGRAM

Projecting the p­v­T surface onto the pressure­specific volume plane results in a p­v diagram,             p­v diagram
as shown by Figs. 3.1c and 3.2c. The figures are labeled with terms that have already been
introduced.

   When solving problems, a sketch of the p­v diagram is frequently convenient. To facili-
tate the use of such a sketch, note the appearance of constant-temperature lines (isotherms).
By inspection of Figs. 3.1c and 3.2c, it can be seen that for any specified temperature less
than the critical temperature, pressure remains constant as the two-phase liquid­vapor region
is traversed, but in the single-phase liquid and vapor regions the pressure decreases at fixed
temperature as specific volume increases. For temperatures greater than or equal to the crit-
ical temperature, pressure decreases continuously at fixed temperature as specific volume in-
creases. There is no passage across the two-phase liquid­vapor region. The critical isotherm
passes through a point of inflection at the critical point and the slope is zero there.

T­v DIAGRAM                                                                                                T­v diagram

Projecting the liquid, two-phase liquid­vapor, and vapor regions of the p­v­T surface onto
the temperature­specific volume plane results in a T­v diagram as in Fig. 3.3. Since con-
sistent patterns are revealed in the p­v­T behavior of all pure substances, Fig. 3.3 showing
a T­v diagram for water can be regarded as representative.

                                    pc = 22.09 MPa

                            30 MPa

                                                       10 MPa

Temperature  Tc             Critical      Vapor
                    Liquid   point

                            Liquid-vapor               1.014 bar
                                                            s

             20°C       f    100°C                                 Figure 3.3 Sketch of a temperature­
                   l                                g             specific volume diagram for water show-
                                                                  ing the liquid, two-phase liquid­vapor,
                            Specific volume                       and vapor regions (not to scale).
74 Chapter 3 Evaluating Properties

                                    As for the p­v diagram, a sketch of the T­v diagram is often convenient for problem
                                solving. To facilitate the use of such a sketch, note the appearance of constant-pressure
                                lines (isobars). For pressures less than the critical pressure, such as the 10 MPa isobar on
                                Fig. 3.3, the pressure remains constant with temperature as the two-phase region is tra-
                                versed. In the single-phase liquid and vapor regions the temperature increases at fixed pres-
                                sure as the specific volume increases. For pressures greater than or equal to the critical
                                pressure, such as the one marked 30 MPa on Fig. 3.3, temperature increases continuously
                                at fixed pressure as the specific volume increases. There is no passage across the two-phase
                                liquid­vapor region.

                                    The projections of the p­v­T surface used in this book to illustrate processes are not
                                generally drawn to scale. A similar comment applies to other property diagrams introduced
                                later.

                    3.2.3 Studying Phase Change

                   It is instructive to study the events that occur as a pure substance undergoes a phase change.
                   To begin, consider a closed system consisting of a unit mass (1 kg) of liquid water at 20C
                   contained within a piston­cylinder assembly, as illustrated in Fig. 3.4a. This state is repre-
                   sented by point l on Fig. 3.3. Suppose the water is slowly heated while its pressure is kept
                   constant and uniform throughout at 1.014 bar.

subcooled liquid   LIQUID STATES
compressed liquid
                   As the system is heated at constant pressure, the temperature increases considerably while
                   the specific volume increases slightly. Eventually, the system is brought to the state repre-
                   sented by f on Fig. 3.3. This is the saturated liquid state corresponding to the specified pres-
                   sure. For water at 1.014 bar the saturation temperature is 100C. The liquid states along the
                   line segment l­f of Fig. 3.3 are sometimes referred to as subcooled liquid states because the
                   temperature at these states is less than the saturation temperature at the given pressure. These
                   states are also referred to as compressed liquid states because the pressure at each state is
                   higher than the saturation pressure corresponding to the temperature at the state. The names
                   liquid, subcooled liquid, and compressed liquid are used interchangeably.

                   TWO-PHASE, LIQUID­VAPOR MIXTURE

                   When the system is at the saturated liquid state (state f of Fig. 3.3), additional heat transfer
                   at fixed pressure results in the formation of vapor without any change in temperature but
                   with a considerable increase in specific volume. As shown in Fig. 3.4b, the system would

                   Liquid water  Water vapor   Water vapor   Figure 3.4 Illustration of
                         (a)     Liquid water       (c)     constant-pressure change from
                                                            liquid to vapor for water.
                                       (b)
                                                                                                   3.2 p­v­T Relation 75

now consist of a two-phase liquid­vapor mixture. When a mixture of liquid and vapor exists         two-phase
in equilibrium, the liquid phase is a saturated liquid and the vapor phase is a saturated va-      liquid­vapor mixture
por. If the system is heated further until the last bit of liquid has vaporized, it is brought to
point g on Fig. 3.3, the saturated vapor state. The intervening two-phase liquid­vapor mixture
states can be distinguished from one another by the quality, an intensive property.

   For a two-phase liquid­vapor mixture, the ratio of the mass of vapor present to the total
mass of the mixture is its quality, x. In symbols,

              x         mvapor      (3.1)  quality
                   mliquid  mvapor

The value of the quality ranges from zero to unity: at saturated liquid states, x  0, and
at saturated vapor states, x  1.0. Although defined as a ratio, the quality is frequently
given as a percentage. Examples illustrating the use of quality are provided in Sec. 3.3.
Similar parameters can be defined for two-phase solid­vapor and two-phase solid­liquid
mixtures.

VAPOR STATES

Let us return to a consideration of Figs. 3.3 and 3.4. When the system is at the saturated va-     superheated vapor
por state (state g on Fig. 3.3), further heating at fixed pressure results in increases in both
temperature and specific volume. The condition of the system would now be as shown in
Fig. 3.4c. The state labeled s on Fig. 3.3 is representative of the states that would be attained
by further heating while keeping the pressure constant. A state such as s is often referred to
as a superheated vapor state because the system would be at a temperature greater than the
saturation temperature corresponding to the given pressure.

   Consider next the same thought experiment at the other constant pressures labeled on
Fig. 3.3, 10 MPa, 22.09 MPa, and 30 MPa. The first of these pressures is less than the crit-
ical pressure of water, the second is the critical pressure, and the third is greater than the
critical pressure. As before, let the system initially contain a liquid at 20C. First, let us
study the system if it were heated slowly at 10 MPa. At this pressure, vapor would form
at a higher temperature than in the previous example, because the saturation pressure is
higher (refer to Fig. 3.3). In addition, there would be somewhat less of an increase in spe-
cific volume from saturated liquid to vapor, as evidenced by the narrowing of the vapor
dome. Apart from this, the general behavior would be the same as before. Next, consider
the behavior of the system were it heated at the critical pressure, or higher. As seen by fol-
lowing the critical isobar on Fig. 3.3, there would be no change in phase from liquid to
vapor. At all states there would be only one phase. Vaporization (and the inverse process
of condensation) can occur only when the pressure is less than the critical pressure. Thus,
at states where pressure is greater than the critical pressure, the terms liquid and vapor tend
to lose their significance. Still, for ease of reference to such states, we use the term liquid
when the temperature is less than the critical temperature and vapor when the temperature
is greater than the critical temperature.

MELTING AND SUBLIMATION

Although the phase change from liquid to vapor (vaporization) is the one of principal interest
in this book, it is also instructive to consider the phase changes from solid to liquid (melt-
ing) and from solid to vapor (sublimation). To study these transitions, consider a system con-
sisting of a unit mass of ice at a temperature below the triple point temperature. Let us begin
76 Chapter 3 Evaluating Properties

                                      Liquid        Critical
                                                    point

                                                 a´´ b´´ c´´

                                    Melting

                                                    Vaporization

              Pressure  ab                    c

                        Solid         Triple point  Vapor
                         Sublimation

                        a´            b´ c´

                                      Temperature                  Figure 3.5 Phase diagram for water (not to
                                                                  scale).

              with the case where the system is at state a of Fig. 3.5, where the pressure is greater than
              the triple point pressure. Suppose the system is slowly heated while maintaining the pres-
              sure constant and uniform throughout. The temperature increases with heating until point b
              on Fig. 3.5 is attained. At this state the ice is a saturated solid. Additional heat transfer at
              fixed pressure results in the formation of liquid without any change in temperature. As the
              system is heated further, the ice continues to melt until eventually the last bit melts, and the
              system contains only saturated liquid. During the melting process the temperature and pres-
              sure remain constant. For most substances, the specific volume increases during melting, but
              for water the specific volume of the liquid is less than the specific volume of the solid. Fur-
              ther heating at fixed pressure results in an increase in temperature as the system is brought
              to point c on Fig. 3.5. Next, consider the case where the system is initially at state a of
              Fig. 3.5, where the pressure is less than the triple point pressure. In this case, if the system
              is heated at constant pressure it passes through the two-phase solid­vapor region into the
              vapor region along the line a­b­c shown on Fig. 3.5. The case of vaporization discussed
              previously is shown on Fig. 3.5 by the line a­b­c.

steam tables  3.3 Retrieving Thermodynamic Properties

              Thermodynamic property data can be retrieved in various ways, including tables, graphs,
              equations, and computer software. The emphasis of the present section is on the use of tables
              of thermodynamic properties, which are commonly available for pure, simple compressible
              substances of engineering interest. The use of these tables is an important skill. The ability
              to locate states on property diagrams is an important related skill. The software available
              with this text, Interactive Thermodynamics: IT, is also used selectively in examples and end-
              of-chapter problems throughout the book. Skillful use of tables and property diagrams is
              prerequisite for the effective use of software to retrieve thermodynamic property data.

                  Since tables for different substances are frequently set up in the same general format, the
              present discussion centers mainly on Tables A-2 through A-6 giving the properties of water;
              these are commonly referred to as the steam tables. Tables A-7 through A-9 for Refrigerant
              22, Tables A-10 through A-12 for Refrigerant 134a, Tables A-13 through A-15 for ammonia,
              and Tables A-16 through A-18 for propane are used similarly, as are tables for other sub-
              stances found in the engineering literature.
                                                                                                        3.3 Retrieving Thermodynamic Properties 77

 3.3.1 Evaluating Pressure, Specific Volume, and Temperature

VAPOR AND LIQUID TABLES

The properties of water vapor are listed in Tables A-4 and of liquid water in Tables A-5.
These are often referred to as the superheated vapor tables and compressed liquid tables, re-
spectively. The sketch of the phase diagram shown in Fig. 3.6 brings out the structure of
these tables. Since pressure and temperature are independent properties in the single-phase
liquid and vapor regions, they can be used to fix the state in these regions. Accordingly,
Tables A-4 and A-5 are set up to give values of several properties as functions of pressure
and temperature. The first property listed is specific volume. The remaining properties are
discussed in subsequent sections.

   For each pressure listed, the values given in the superheated vapor table (Tables A-4) begin
with the saturated vapor state and then proceed to higher temperatures. The data in the com-
pressed liquid table (Tables A-5) end with saturated liquid states. That is, for a given pres-
sure the property values are given as the temperature increases to the saturation temperature.
In these tables, the value shown in parentheses after the pressure in the table heading is the
corresponding saturation temperature.  for example. . . in Tables A-4 and A-5, at a
pressure of 10.0 MPa, the saturation temperature is listed as 311.06C. 

 for example. . . to gain more experience with Tables A-4 and A-5 verify the following:
Table A-4 gives the specific volume of water vapor at 10.0 MPa and 600C as 0.03837 m3/kg.

At 10.0 MPa and 100C, Table A-5 gives the specific volume of liquid water as 1.0385 
103 m3/kg. 

   The states encountered when solving problems often do not fall exactly on the grid of val-            linear interpolation
ues provided by property tables. Interpolation between adjacent table entries then becomes
necessary. Care always must be exercised when interpolating table values. The tables pro-
vided in the Appendix are extracted from more extensive tables that are set up so that linear
interpolation, illustrated in the following example, can be used with acceptable accuracy.
Linear interpolation is assumed to remain valid when using the abridged tables of the text
for the solved examples and end-of-chapter problems.

                 Liquid       Compressed liquid
                              tables give v, u, h, s

                                   versus p, T

                                               Critical
                                               point

Pressure  Solid               Vapor

                              Superheated                 Figure 3.6 Sketch of the phase diagram
                              vapor tables               for water used to discuss the structure of the
                              give v, u, h, s            superheated vapor and compressed liquid
                               versus p, T               tables (not to scale).

                 Temperature
78 Chapter 3 Evaluating Properties

                                                                   ( )m3
                                                                        240°C,  0.2275  ----

                                                                                        kg

v (m3/kg)                                                                                     p = 10 bar

                                                  (215°C, v)                       T(°C)          v (m3/kg)

                                                                                        200       0.2060

           ( )m3                                                                        215       v=?

           200°C,                   0.2060  ----                                        240       0.2275

                                            kg

           200                              215                    240

                                                  T(°C)

 Figure 3.7 Illustration of linear interpolation.

 for example. . . let us determine the specific volume of water vapor at a state where
p  10 bar and T  215C. Shown in Fig. 3.7 is a sampling of data from Table A-4. At a
pressure of 10 bar, the specified temperature of 215C falls between the table values of 200
and 240C, which are shown in bold face. The corresponding specific volume values are also
shown in bold face. To determine the specific volume v corresponding to 215C, we may

think of the slope of a straight line joining the adjacent table states, as follows

                                                    10.2275  0.20602 m3/kg 1v  0.20602 m3/kg
                                            slope                                        1215  2002°C
                                                              1240  2002°C

Solving for v, the result is v  0.2141 m3/kg. 

SATURATION TABLES

The saturation tables, Tables A-2 and A-3, list property values for the saturated liquid and
vapor states. The property values at these states are denoted by the subscripts f and g, re-
spectively. Table A-2 is called the temperature table, because temperatures are listed in the
first column in convenient increments. The second column gives the corresponding satura-
tion pressures. The next two columns give, respectively, the specific volume of saturated liq-
uid, vf, and the specific volume of saturated vapor, vg. Table A-3 is called the pressure table,
because pressures are listed in the first column in convenient increments. The corresponding
saturation temperatures are given in the second column. The next two columns give vf and
vg, respectively.

   The specific volume of a two-phase liquid­vapor mixture can be determined by using the
saturation tables and the definition of quality given by Eq. 3.1 as follows. The total volume
of the mixture is the sum of the volumes of the liquid and vapor phases

                                              V  Vliq  Vvap

Dividing by the total mass of the mixture, m, an average specific volume for the mixture is
obtained

                                           v  V  Vliq  Vvap
                                                 mm m

Since the liquid phase is a saturated liquid and the vapor phase is a saturated vapor, Vliq 
mliq vf and Vvap  mvap vg, so

                                                              v    a mliq b  vf    a mvap b   vg
                                                                     m                m
                                                                                                        3.3 Retrieving Thermodynamic Properties 79

Introducing the definition of quality, x  mvapm, and noting that mliqm  1  x, the above
expression becomes

                                             v  11  x2 vf  xvg  vf  x 1vg  vf2  (3.2) 

The increase in specific volume on vaporization (vg  vf) is also denoted by vfg.

    for example. . . consider a system consisting of a two-phase liquid­vapor mixture
of water at 100C and a quality of 0.9. From Table A-2 at 100C, vf  1.0435  103 m3/kg
and vg  1.673 m3/kg. The specific volume of the mixture is

v  vf  x1vg  vf2  1.0435  103  10.92 11.673  1.0435  1032  1.506 m3/kg 

   To facilitate locating states in the tables, it is often convenient to use values from the
saturation tables together with a sketch of a T­v or p­v diagram. For example, if the specific
volume v and temperature T are known, refer to the temperature table, Table A-2, and deter-
mine the values of vf and vg. A T­v diagram illustrating these data is given in Fig. 3.8. If the
given specific volume falls between vf and vg, the system consists of a two-phase liquid­vapor
mixture, and the pressure is the saturation pressure corresponding to the given temperature.
The quality can be found by solving Eq. 3.2. If the given specific volume is greater than vg,
the state is in the superheated vapor region. Then, by interpolating in Table A-4 the pressure
and other properties listed can be determined. If the given specific volume is less than vf,
Table A-5 would be used to determine the pressure and other properties.

    for example. . . let us determine the pressure of water at each of three states defined                       T  3f 2  g1
by a temperature of 100C and specific volumes, respectively, of v1  2.434 m3/kg, v2                          100°C                v
1.0 m3/kg, and v3  1.0423  103 m3/kg. Using the known temperature, Table A-2 pro-
vides the values of vf and vg: vf  1.0435  103 m3/kg, vg  1.673 m3/kg. Since v1 is
greater than vg, state 1 is in the vapor region. Table A-4 gives the pressure as 0.70 bar. Next,
since v2 falls between vf and vg, the pressure is the saturation pressure corresponding to
100C, which is 1.014 bar. Finally, since v3 is less than vf, state 3 is in the liquid region.

Table A-5 gives the pressure as 25 bar. 

EXAMPLES

The following two examples feature the use of sketches of p­v and T­v diagrams in conjunction
with tabular data to fix the end states of processes. In accord with the state principle, two inde-
pendent intensive properties must be known to fix the state of the systems under consideration.

                 Critical point

                         Saturated           Saturated  Vapor
             Liquid liquid                   vapor

Temperature            v < vf                      v > vg
                                vf < v < vg  g

                    f

             vf                              vg                 Figure 3.8 Sketch of a T­v diagram for
                                                               water used to discuss locating states in the
                 Specific volume                               tables.
80 Chapter 3 Evaluating Properties

    E X A M P L E 3 . 1 Heating Water at Constant Volume

    A closed, rigid container of volume 0.5 m3 is placed on a hot plate. Initially, the container holds a two-phase mixture of sat-
    urated liquid water and saturated water vapor at p1  1 bar with a quality of 0.5. After heating, the pressure in the container
    is p2  1.5 bar. Indicate the initial and final states on a T­v diagram, and determine
    (a) the temperature, in C, at each state.
    (b) the mass of vapor present at each state, in kg.
    (c) If heating continues, determine the pressure, in bar, when the container holds only saturated vapor.

    SOLUTION
    Known: A two-phase liquid­vapor mixture of water in a closed, rigid container is heated on a hot plate. The initial pressure
    and quality and the final pressure are known.
    Find: Indicate the initial and final states on a T­v diagram and determine at each state the temperature and the mass of water
    vapor present. Also, if heating continues, determine the pressure when the container holds only saturated vapor.
    Schematic and Given Data:

                                                                            T

  p1 = 1 bar                                                                3  1.5 bar
  x1 = 0.5
  p2 = 1.5 bar  V = 0.5 m3
  x3 = 1.0

                                                                            2           1 bar

                                                                            1

  +  ­          Hot plate

                                                                                                   v
                                                                                                            Figure E3.1

  Assumptions:

  1. The water in the container is a closed system.
  2. States 1, 2, and 3 are equilibrium states.
  3. The volume of the container remains constant.

  Analysis: Two independent properties are required to fix states 1 and 2. At the initial state, the pressure and quality are
  known. As these are independent, the state is fixed. State 1 is shown on the T­v diagram in the two-phase region. The spe-
  cific volume at state 1 is found using the given quality and Eq. 3.2. That is

                                                     v1  vf1  x 1vgl  vfl2

  From Table A-3 at p1  1 bar, vfl  1.0432  103 m3/kg and vg1  1.694 m3/kg. Thus

                v1  1.0432  103  0.5 11.694  1.0432  1032  0.8475 m3/kg

      At state 2, the pressure is known. The other property required to fix the state is the specific volume v2. Volume and mass are
  each constant, so v2  v1  0.8475 m3/kg. For p2  1.5 bar, Table A-3 gives vf2  1.0582  103 and vg2  1.159 m3/kg. Since

                                                     vf2 6 v2 6 vg2

 state 2 must be in the two-phase region as well. State 2 is also shown on the T­v diagram above.
                                                        3.3 Retrieving Thermodynamic Properties 81

(a) Since states 1 and 2 are in the two-phase liquid­vapor region, the temperatures correspond to the saturation temperatures
for the given pressures. Table A-3 gives

                                                   T1  99.63°C and T2  111.4°C
(b) To find the mass of water vapor present, we first use the volume and the specific volume to find the total mass, m. That is

                        m    V        0.5 m3      0.59  kg
                             v    0.8475 m3/kg

Then, with Eq. 3.1 and the given value of quality, the mass of vapor at state 1 is

                    mg1  x1m  0.5 10.59 kg2  0.295 kg

The mass of vapor at state 2 is found similarly using the quality x2. To determine x2, solve Eq. 3.2 for quality and insert spe-
cific volume data from Table A-3 at a pressure of 1.5 bar, along with the known value of v, as follows

                    x2     v  vf2
                           vg2  vf2

                           0.8475  1.0528  103      0.731
                           1.159  1.0528  103

Then, with Eq. 3.1

                                                             mg2  0.731 10.59 kg2  0.431 kg

 (c) If heating continued, state 3 would be on the saturated vapor line, as shown on the T­v diagram above. Thus, the pres-

     sure would be the corresponding saturation pressure. Interpolating in Table A-3 at vg  0.8475 m3/kg, we get p3  2.11 bar.

 The procedure for fixing state 2 is the same as illustrated in the discussion of Fig. 3.8.
 Since the process occurs at constant specific volume, the states lie along a vertical line.
 If heating continued at constant volume past state 3, the final state would be in the superheated vapor region, and prop-

    erty data would then be found in Table A-4. As an exercise, verify that for a final pressure of 3 bar, the temperature would
    be approximately 282C.

E X A M P L E 3 . 2 Heating Ammonia at Constant Pressure

A vertical piston­cylinder assembly containing 0.05 kg of ammonia, initially a saturated vapor, is placed on a hot plate. Due
to the weight of the piston and the surrounding atmospheric pressure, the pressure of the ammonia is 1.5 bars. Heating occurs
slowly, and the ammonia expands at constant pressure until the final temperature is 25C. Show the initial and final states on
T­v and p­v diagrams, and determine
(a) the volume occupied by the ammonia at each state, in m3.
(b) the work for the process, in kJ.

SOLUTION

Known: Ammonia is heated at constant pressure in a vertical piston­cylinder assembly from the saturated vapor state to a
known final temperature.
Find: Show the initial and final states on T­v and p­v diagrams, and determine the volume at each state and the work for
the process.
82 Chapter 3 Evaluating Properties
    Schematic and Given Data:

         T                                      2                                 Ammonia
    25°C                                                                                              Hot plate
25.2°C                              1
                                                          +
         p                                                   ­

                                                   v

                                                          Assumptions:

                                                          1. The ammonia is a closed system.

                                    25°C                  2. States 1 and 2 are equilibrium states.
                                         1
                       1.5 bars               2           3. The process occurs at constant pressure.

                                                          v
                                                                    Figure E3.2

Analysis: The initial state is a saturated vapor condition at 1.5 bars. Since the process occurs at constant pressure, the final
state is in the superheated vapor region and is fixed by p2  1.5 bars and T2  25C. The initial and final states are shown
on the T­v and p­v diagrams above.

(a) The volumes occupied by the ammonia at states 1 and 2 are obtained using the given mass and the respective specific
volumes. From Table A-14 at p1  1.5 bars, we get v1  vg1  0.7787 m3/kg. Thus

                                                     V1  mv1  10.05 kg2 10.7787 m3/kg2
                                                          0.0389 m3

Interpolating in Table A-15 at p2  1.5 bars and T2  25C, we get v2  .9553 m3/kg. Thus
                                              V2  mv2  10.05 kg2 1.9553 m3/kg2  0.0478 m3

(b) In this case, the work can be evaluated using Eq. 2.17. Since the pressure is constant

                                                  V2

                                              W  p dV  p1V2  V12

                                                           V1

     Inserting values            W  11.5 bars210.0478     0.03892m3 ` 105 N/m2 `       kJ
                                                                          1 bar   ` 103 N # m `


                                 W  1.335 kJ

 Note the use of conversion factors in this calculation.
                                                                   3.3 Retrieving Thermodynamic Properties 83

 3.3.2 Evaluating Specific Internal Energy and Enthalpy

In many thermodynamic analyses the sum of the internal energy U and the product of pres-
sure p and volume V appears. Because the sum U  pV occurs so frequently in subsequent

discussions, it is convenient to give the combination a name, enthalpy, and a distinct symbol,      enthalpy

H. By definition

                               H  U  pV                            (3.3)

Since U, p, and V are all properties, this combination is also a property. Enthalpy can be
expressed on a unit mass basis

                               h  u  pv                            (3.4)

and per mole

                               h  u  pv                            (3.5)

Units for enthalpy are the same as those for internal energy.
   The property tables introduced in Sec. 3.3.1 giving pressure, specific volume, and tem-

perature also provide values of specific internal energy u, enthalpy h, and entropy s. Use of
these tables to evaluate u and h is described in the present section; the consideration of en-
tropy is deferred until it is introduced in Chap. 6.

   Data for specific internal energy u and enthalpy h are retrieved from the property tables
in the same way as for specific volume. For saturation states, the values of uf and ug, as well
as hf and hg, are tabulated versus both saturation pressure and saturation temperature. The
specific internal energy for a two-phase liquid­vapor mixture is calculated for a given qual-
ity in the same way the specific volume is calculated

                  u  11  x2uf  xug  uf  x 1ug  uf2                 (3.6) 

The increase in specific internal energy on vaporization (ug  uf) is often denoted by ufg.
Similarly, the specific enthalpy for a two-phase liquid­vapor mixture is given in terms of the
quality by

                  h  11  x2hf  xhg  hf  x 1hg  hf2                 (3.7) 

The increase in enthalpy during vaporization (hg  hf) is often tabulated for convenience
under the heading hfg.

    for example. . . to illustrate the use of Eqs. 3.6 and 3.7, we determine the specific
enthalpy of Refrigerant 22 when its temperature is 12C and its specific internal energy is

144.58 kJ/kg. Referring to Table A-7, the given internal energy value falls between uf and ug
at 12C, so the state is a two-phase liquid­vapor mixture. The quality of the mixture is found

by using Eq. 3.6 and data from Table A-7 as follows:

                  x    u  uf     144.58              58.77    0.5
                       ug  uf    230.38              58.77

Then, with the values from Table A-7, Eq. 3.7 gives

                  h  11  x2hf  xhg
                     11  0.52 159.352  0.51253.992  156.67 kJ/kg 

   In the superheated vapor tables, u and h are tabulated along with v as functions of temperature
and pressure.  for example. . . let us evaluate T, v, and h for water at 0.10 MPa and a
84 Chapter 3 Evaluating Properties

Thermodynamics in the News...

Natural Refrigerants--Back to the Future                          using propane are now available in
                                                                  Europe. Manufacturers claim they are
Naturally-occurring refrigerants like hydrocarbons, ammonia,      safer than gas-burning home appliances.
and carbon dioxide were introduced in the early 1900s. They       Researchers are studying ways to elimi-
were displaced in the 1920s by safer chlorine-based synthetic     nate leaks so ammonia can find more
refrigerants, paving the way for the refrigerators and air        widespread application. Carbon dioxide is
conditioners we enjoy today. Over the last decade, these syn-     also being looked at again with an eye to
thetics largely have been replaced by hydroflourocarbons          minimizing safety issues related to its
(HFC's) because of uneasiness over ozone depletion. But stud-     relatively high pressures in refrigeration
ies now indicate that natural refrigerants may be preferable to   applications.
HFC's because of lower overall impact on global warming. This
has sparked renewed interest in natural refrigerants.                 Neither HFCs nor natural refrigerants do well on measures
                                                                  of direct global warming impact. However, a new index that
    Decades of research and development went into the current     takes energy efficiency into account is changing how we view
refrigerants, so returning to natural refrigerants creates chal-  refrigerants. Because of the potential for increased energy ef-
lenges, experts say. Engineers are revisiting the concerns of     ficiency of refrigerators using natural refrigerants, the natu-
flammability, odor, and safety that naturals present, and are     rals score well on the new index compared to HFCs.
meeting with some success. New energy-efficient refrigerators

                  specific internal energy of 2537.3 kJ/kg. Turning to Table A-3, note that the given value of u

                  is greater than ug at 0.1 MPa (ug  2506.1 kJ/kg). This suggests that the state lies in the
                  superheated vapor region. From Table A-4 it is found that T  120C, v  1.793 m3/kg, and

                  h  2716.6 kJ/kg. Alternatively, h and u are related by the definition of h

                                    h  u  pv

                                              kJ                    a105  N   b  a1.793  m3  b  `     1 kJ  m  `
                                      2537.3                              m2             kg        103 N #

                                              kg

                                     2537.3  179.3  2716.6 kJ/kg 

                     Specific internal energy and enthalpy data for liquid states of water are presented in
                  Tables A-5. The format of these tables is the same as that of the superheated vapor tables
                  considered previously. Accordingly, property values for liquid states are retrieved in the same
                  manner as those of vapor states.

                     For water, Tables A-6 give the equilibrium properties of saturated solid and saturated vapor.
                  The first column lists the temperature, and the second column gives the corresponding sat-
                  uration pressure. These states are at pressures and temperatures below those at the triple point.
                  The next two columns give the specific volume of saturated solid, vi, and saturated vapor,
                  vg, respectively. The table also provides the specific internal energy, enthalpy, and entropy
                  values for the saturated solid and the saturated vapor at each of the temperatures listed.

reference states  REFERENCE STATES AND REFERENCE VALUES
reference values
                  The values of u, h, and s given in the property tables are not obtained by direct measurement
                  but are calculated from other data that can be more readily determined experimentally. The
                  computational procedures require use of the second law of thermodynamics, so consideration
                  of these procedures is deferred to Chap. 11 after the second law has been introduced. However,
                  because u, h, and s are calculated, the matter of reference states and reference values be-
                  comes important and is considered briefly in the following paragraphs.

                     When applying the energy balance, it is differences in internal, kinetic, and potential en-
                  ergy between two states that are important, and not the values of these energy quantities at
                  each of the two states.  for example. . . consider the case of potential energy. The nu-
                  merical value of potential energy determined relative to the surface of the earth is different from
                  the value relative to the top of a tall building at the same location. However, the difference in
                                                                                                        3.3 Retrieving Thermodynamic Properties 85

potential energy between any two elevations is precisely the same regardless of the datum
selected, because the datum cancels in the calculation. 

   Similarly, values can be assigned to specific internal energy and enthalpy relative to ar-
bitrary reference values at arbitrary reference states. As for the case of potential energy con-
sidered above, the use of values of a particular property determined relative to an arbitrary
reference is unambiguous as long as the calculations being performed involve only differ-
ences in that property, for then the reference value cancels. When chemical reactions take
place among the substances under consideration, special attention must be given to the mat-
ter of reference states and values, however. A discussion of how property values are assigned
when analyzing reactive systems is given in Chap. 13.

   The tabular values of u and h for water, ammonia, propane, and Refrigerants 22 and 134a
provided in the Appendix are relative to the following reference states and values. For water,
the reference state is saturated liquid at 0.01C. At this state, the specific internal energy is
set to zero. Values of the specific enthalpy are calculated from h  u  pv, using the tabu-
lated values for p, v, and u. For ammonia, propane, and the refrigerants, the reference state
is saturated liquid at 40C. At this reference state the specific enthalpy is set to zero. Val-
ues of specific internal energy are calculated from u  h  pv by using the tabulated values
for p, v, and h. Notice in Table A-7 that this leads to a negative value for internal energy at
the reference state, which emphasizes that it is not the numerical values assigned to u and h
at a given state that are important but their differences between states. The values assigned to
particular states change if the reference state or reference values change, but the differences
remain the same.

 3.3.3 Evaluating Properties Using Computer Software

The use of computer software for evaluating thermodynamic properties is becoming preva-
lent in engineering. Computer software falls into two general categories: those that provide
data only at individual states and those that provide property data as part of a more general
simulation package. The software available with this text, Interactive Thermodynamics: IT,
is a tool that can be used not only for routine problem solving by providing data at individ-
ual state points, but also for simulation and analysis (see box).

    USING INTERACTIVE THERMODYNAMICS: IT

   The computer software tool Interactive Thermodynamics: IT is available for use with
   this text. Used properly, IT provides an important adjunct to learning engineering ther-
   modynamics and solving engineering problems. The program is built around an equa-
   tion solver enhanced with thermodynamic property data and other valuable features.
   With IT you can obtain a single numerical solution or vary parameters to investigate
   their effects.You also can obtain graphical output, and the Windows-based format allows
   you to use any Windows word-processing software or spreadsheet to generate reports.
   Other features of IT include:

    a guided series of help screens and a number of sample solved examples from the
       text to help you learn how to use the program.

    drag-and-drop templates for many of the standard problem types, including a list
       of assumptions that you can customize to the problem at hand.

    predetermined scenarios for power plants and other important applications.
    thermodynamic property data for water, refrigerants 22 and 134a, ammonia,

       air­water vapor mixtures, and a number of ideal gases.
86 Chapter 3 Evaluating Properties

                                     the capability to input user-supplied data.
                                     the capability to interface with user-supplied routines.

                                        The software is best used as an adjunct to the problem-solving process discussed in
                                    Sec. 1.7.3. The equation-solving capability of the program cannot substitute for care-
                                    ful engineering analysis. You still must develop models and analyze them, perform lim-
                                    ited hand calculations, and estimate ranges of parameters and property values before
                                    you move to the computer to obtain solutions and explore possible variations. Afterward,
                                    you also must assess the answers to see that they are reasonable.

                                    IT provides data for substances represented in the Appendix tables. Generally, data are
                                retrieved by simple call statements that are placed in the workspace of the program.
                                 for example. . . consider the two-phase, liquid­vapor mixture at state 1 of Example
                                3.1 for which p  1 bar, v  0.8475 m3/kg. The following illustrates how data for saturation
                                temperature, quality, and specific internal energy are retrieved using IT. The functions for T,
                                v, and u are obtained by selecting Water/Steam from the Properties menu. Choosing SI units
                                from the Units menu, with p in bar, T in C, and amount of substance in kg, the IT program is

                                        p = 1 // bar
                                        v = 0.8475 // m3/kg
                                        T = Tsat_P("Water/Steam",p)
                                        v = vsat_Px("Water/Steam",p,x)
                                        u = usat_Px(Water/Steam",p,x)

                                Clicking the Solve button, the software returns values of T  99.63C, x  0.5, and u 
                                1462 kJ/kg. These values can be verified using data from Table A-3. Note that text inserted
                                between the symbol // and a line return is treated as a comment. 

                                    The previous example illustrates an important feature of IT. Although the quality, x, is im-
                                plicit in the list of arguments in the expression for specific volume, there is no need to solve
                                the expression algebraically for x. Rather, the program can solve for x as long as the num-
                                ber of equations equals the number of unknowns.

                                    Other features of Interactive Thermodynamics: IT are illustrated through subsequent ex-
                                amples. The use of computer software for engineering analysis is a powerful approach. Still,
                                there are some rules to observe:

                                     Software complements and extends careful analysis, but does not substitute for it.
                                     Computer-generated values should be checked selectively against hand-calculated,

                                       or otherwise independently determined values.
                                     Computer-generated plots should be studied to see if the curves appear reasonable

                                       and exhibit expected trends.

                                 3.3.4 Examples

                                In the following examples, closed systems undergoing processes are analyzed using the energy
                                balance. In each case, sketches of p­v and/or T­v diagrams are used in conjunction with
                                appropriate tables to obtain the required property data. Using property diagrams and table data
                                introduces an additional level of complexity compared to similar problems in Chap. 2.
                                                                                                    3.3 Retrieving Thermodynamic Properties 87

E X A M P L E 3 . 3 Stirring Water at Constant Volume

A well-insulated rigid tank having a volume of .25 m3 contains saturated water vapor at 100C. The water is rapidly stirred
until the pressure is 1.5 bars. Determine the temperature at the final state, in C, and the work during the process, in kJ.

SOLUTION
Known: By rapid stirring, water vapor in a well-insulated rigid tank is brought from the saturated vapor state at 100C to a
pressure of 1.5 bars.
Find: Determine the temperature at the final state and the work.
Schematic and Given Data:

                                            Water

        p                        Boundary
                                                  T

                   1.5 bars      2                         1.5 bars     2
                  1.014 bars            T2                                     T2
                                                            1.014 bars
                              1                                100C     1

                                            100°C

                                            v                                      v                         Figure E3.3

Assumptions:

1. The water is a closed system.
2. The initial and final states are at equilibrium. There is no net change in kinetic or potential energy.
3. There is no heat transfer with the surroundings.
4. The tank volume remains constant.

Analysis: To determine the final equilibrium state, the values of two independent intensive properties are required. One of
these is pressure, p2  1.5 bars, and the other is the specific volume: v2  v1. The initial and final specific volumes are equal
because the total mass and total volume are unchanged in the process. The initial and final states are located on the accom-
panying T­v and p­v diagrams.

    From Table A-2, v1  vg(100C)  1.673 m3/kg, u1  ug(100C)  2506.5 kJ/ kg. By using v2  v1 and interpolating in
Table A-4 at p2  1.5 bars.

                                                      T2  273°C, u2  2767.8 kJ/kg

    Next, with assumptions 2 and 3 an energy balance for the system reduces to

                                                     0  0  0

                                            ˘U  ˘KE  ˘PE  Q  W

On rearrangement

                                            W  1U2  U12  m1u2  u12
88 Chapter 3 Evaluating Properties

To evaluate W requires the system mass. This can be determined from the volume and specific volume

                                           m      V     a    0.25 m3    b    0.149  kg
                                                  v1       1.673 m3/kg

Finally, by inserting values into the expression for W

                      W  1.149 kg212767.8  2506.52 kJ/kg  38.9 kJ

where the minus sign signifies that the energy transfer by work is to the system.

 Although the initial and final states are equilibrium states, the intervening states are not at equilibrium. To emphasize this,

    the process has been indicated on the T­v and p­v diagrams by a dashed line. Solid lines on property diagrams are re-

    served for processes that pass through equilibrium states only (quasiequilibrium processes). The analysis illustrates the im-

    portance of carefully sketched property diagrams as an adjunct to problem solving.

E X A M P L E 3 . 4 Analyzing Two Processes in Series

Water contained in a piston­cylinder assembly undergoes two processes in series from an initial state where the pressure is
10 bar and the temperature is 400C.

Process 1­2: The water is cooled as it is compressed at a constant pressure of 10 bar to the saturated vapor state.
Process 2­3: The water is cooled at constant volume to 150C.
(a) Sketch both processes on T­v and p­v diagrams.
(b) For the overall process determine the work, in kJ/kg.
(c) For the overall process determine the heat transfer, in kJ/kg.

SOLUTION
Known: Water contained in a piston­cylinder assembly undergoes two processes: It is cooled and compressed while keep-
ing the pressure constant, and then cooled at constant volume.
Find: Sketch both processes on T­v and p­v diagrams. Determine the net work and the net heat transfer for the overall
process per unit of mass contained within the piston­cylinder assembly.
Schematic and Given Data:

                                           Water

                                              Boundary                                  10 bar

p                                                       T                               1 400°C

   10 bar  2                        400°C     1                         179.9°C
                                                                                            2
   4.758 bar                        179.9°C
                   3                   150°C                                                        4.758 bar
                                                                         150°C
                                                 v
                                                                                         3

                                                                                                                     v
                                                                                                                               Figure E3.4
                                                                              3.3 Retrieving Thermodynamic Properties 89

Assumptions:

1. The water is a closed system.
2. The piston is the only work mode.
3. There are no changes in kinetic or potential energy.

Analysis:

(a) The accompanying T­v and p­v diagrams show the two processes. Since the temperature at state 1, T1  400C, is greater
than the saturation temperature corresponding to p1  10 bar: 179.9C, state 1 is located in the superheat region.
(b) Since the piston is the only work mechanism

                                                    3          2          3         0

                         W  p dV  p dV  p dV

                                                 1       1                2

The second integral vanishes because the volume is constant in Process 2­3. Dividing by the mass and noting that the pres-
sure is constant for Process 1­2

                                                       W
                                                       m  p1v2  v12

The specific volume at state 1 is found from Table A-4 using p1  10 bar and T1  400C: v1  0.3066 m3/kg. Also, u1 
2957.3 kJ/kg. The specific volume at state 2 is the saturated vapor value at 10 bar: v2  0.1944 m3/kg, from Table A-3. Hence

                W                                                 m3 105 N/m2 1 kJ
                    110 bar210.1944  0.30662 a b `                                  ` ` 103 N # m `
                m                                                 kg         1 bar

                    112.2 kJ/kg

The minus sign indicates that work is done on the water vapor by the piston.
(c) An energy balance for the overall process reduces to

                                                    m1u3  u12  Q  W

By rearranging

                                                    Q                  W
                                                    m  1u3  u12  m

To evaluate the heat transfer requires u3, the specific internal energy at state 3. Since T3 is given and v3  v2, two independent
intensive properties are known that together fix state 3. To find u3, first solve for the quality

                   x3    v3  vf3                       0.1944     1.0905     103       0.494
                         vg3  vf3                      0.3928     1.0905     103

where vf3 and vg3 are from Table A-2 at 150C. Then

                u3  uf3  x31ug3  uf32  631.68  0.49412559.5  631.982
                    1583.9 kJ/kg

where uf3 and ug3 are from Table A-2 at 150C.
    Substituting values into the energy balance

                   Q
                       1583.9  2957.3  1112.22  1485.6 kJ/kg

                   m

The minus sign shows that energy is transferred out by heat transfer.

   The next example illustrates the use of Interactive Thermodynamics: IT for solving problems.
In this case, the software evaluates the property data, calculates the results, and displays the re-
sults graphically.
90 Chapter 3 Evaluating Properties

  E X A M P L E 3 . 5 Plotting Thermodynamic Data Using Software

  For the system of Example 3.1, plot the heat transfer, in kJ, and the mass of saturated vapor present, in kg, each versus pres-
  sure at state 2 ranging from 1 to 2 bar. Discuss the results.

  SOLUTION

  Known: A two-phase liquid­vapor mixture of water in a closed, rigid container is heated on a hot plate. The initial pressure
  and quality are known. The pressure at the final state ranges from 1 to 2 bar.

  Find: Plot the heat transfer and the mass of saturated vapor present, each versus pressure at the final state. Discuss.

  Schematic and Given Data: See Figure E3.1.

  Assumptions:

  1. There is no work.
  2. Kinetic and potential energy effects are negligible.
  3. See Example 3.1 for other assumptions.

  Analysis: The heat transfer is obtained from the energy balance. With assumptions 1 and 2, the energy balance reduces to

                                                           0  0  0
                                      ˘U  ˘KE  ˘PE  Q  W

  or
                                                                    Q  m1u2  u12

      Selecting Water/Steam from the Properties menu and choosing SI Units from the Units menu, the IT program for obtaining
  the required data and making the plots is

  // Given data--State 1

  p1 = 1 // bar

  x1 = 0.5

  V = 0.5 // m3

  // Evaluate property data--State 1

  v1 = vsat_Px("Water/Steam",p1,x1)

  u1 = usat_Px("Water/Steam",p1,x1)

  // Calculate the mass

  m = V/v1

  // Fix state 2

  v2 = v1

  p2 = 1.5 // bar

  // Evaluate property data--State 2

  v2 = vsat_Px("Water/Steam",p2,x2)

  u2 = usat_Px("Water/Steam",p2,x2)

  // Calculate the mass of saturated vapor present

  mg2 = x2 * m

  // Determine the pressure for which the quality is unity

  v3 = v1

  v3 = vsat_Px("Water/Steam",p3,1)

  // Energy balance to determine the heat transfer

  m * (u2 ­ u1) = Q ­ W

  W=0

  Click the Solve button to obtain a solution for p2  1.5 bar. The program returns values of v1  0.8475 m3/kg and m  0.59 kg.
  Also, at p2  1.5 bar, the program gives mg2  0.4311 kg. These values agree with the values determined in Example 3.1.

      Now that the computer program has been verified, use the Explore button to vary pressure from 1 to 2 bar in steps of 0.1

  bar. Then, use the Graph button to construct the required plots. The results are:
                                                                                     3.3 Retrieving Thermodynamic Properties 91

600                                                                             0.6

500                                                                             0.5

400                                                                             0.4

Q, kJ300                                                                        0.3
                                                                        mg, kg

200                                                                             0.2

100                                                                             0.1

0                                                                               0
 1 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9 2                                         1 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.9 2
                       Pressure, bar                                                                   Pressure, bar

                                                                                                                           Figure E3.5

We conclude from the first of these graphs that the heat transfer to the water varies directly with the pressure. The plot of mg
shows that the mass of saturated vapor present also increases as the pressure increases. Both of these results are in accord
with expectations for the process.

 Using the Browse button, the computer solution indicates that the pressure for which the quality becomes unity is 2.096

    bar. Thus, for pressures ranging from 1 to 2 bar, all of the states are in the two-phase liquid­vapor region.

 3.3.5 Evaluating Specific Heats cv and cp

Several properties related to internal energy are important in thermodynamics. One of these
is the property enthalpy introduced in Sec. 3.3.2. Two others, known as specific heats, are
considered in this section. The specific heats are particularly useful for thermodynamic cal-
culations involving the ideal gas model introduced in Sec. 3.5.

   The intensive properties cv and cp are defined for pure, simple compressible substances
as partial derivatives of the functions u(T, v) and h(T, p), respectively

     cv    0u b                                                                      (3.8)
           0T v

           0h
     cp       b                                                                      (3.9)
           0T p

where the subscripts v and p denote, respectively, the variables held fixed during differentiation.
Values for cv and cp can be obtained via statistical mechanics using spectroscopic measurements.
They also can be determined macroscopically through exacting property measurements. Since
u and h can be expressed either on a unit mass basis or per mole, values of the specific heats
can be similarly expressed. SI units are kJ/kg # K or kJ/kmol # K.

   The property k, called the specific heat ratio, is simply the ratio

     k  cp                                                                           (3.10)
          cv

   The properties cv and cp are referred to as specific heats (or heat capacities) because un-       specific heats
der certain special conditions they relate the temperature change of a system to the amount
of energy added by heat transfer. However, it is generally preferable to think of cv and cp in
terms of their definitions, Eqs. 3.8 and 3.9, and not with reference to this limited interpreta-
tion involving heat transfer.
92 Chapter 3 Evaluating Properties

                                    In general, cv is a function of v and T (or p and T ), and cp depends on both p and T (or
                                v and T ). Figure 3.9 shows how cp for water vapor varies as a function of temperature and
                                pressure. The vapor phases of other substances exhibit similar behavior. Note that the figure
                                gives the variation of cp with temperature in the limit as pressure tends to zero. In this limit,
                                cp increases with increasing temperature, which is a characteristic exhibited by other gases
                                as well. We will refer again to such zero-pressure values for cv and cp in Sec. 3.6.

                                    Specific heat data are available for common gases, liquids, and solids. Data for gases are
                                introduced in Sec. 3.5 as a part of the discussion of the ideal gas model. Specific heat val-
                                ues for some common liquids and solids are introduced in Sec. 3.3.6 as a part of the dis-
                                cussion of the incompressible substance model.

                 p = constant   3.3.6 Evaluating Properties of Liquids and Solids

T  Saturated                   Special methods often can be used to evaluate properties of liquids and solids. These meth-
                               ods provide simple, yet accurate, approximations that do not require exact compilations like
   liquid                      the compressed liquid tables for water, Tables A-5. Two such special methods are discussed
                               next: approximations using saturated liquid data and the incompressible substance model.
   p = constant

         f                     APPROXIMATIONS FOR LIQUIDS USING SATURATED LIQUID DATA
         T = constant

         v(T, p)  vf (T )      Approximate values for v, u, and h at liquid states can be obtained using saturated liquid
                               data. To illustrate, refer to the compressed liquid tables. Tables A-5. These tables show

   v vf                v

                                            9

                                            8                                          60

                                            7                                          70

                                                                                           80

                                            6         Saturated vapor                         90

                               cp, kJ/kg·K                                                    100                60

                                            5                                                                    70
                                                                                                                 80

                                                                                                                 90

                                                                                                        50       100 MPa

                                            4                                                               MPa
                                                                                                        40

                                                                                                    30
                                                                                                 25
                                                                                              20

                                                                                       15

                                            3                                     10
                                                                               5

                                                           2
                                                      1

                                            2    0

                                                      Zero pressure limit
                               1.5

                                            100  200  300                         400         500       600      700  800

                                                                                       T, °C

                                Figure 3.9 cp of water vapor as a function of temperature and pressure.
                                                                                                        3.3 Retrieving Thermodynamic Properties 93

that the specific volume and specific internal energy change very little with pressure at a
fixed temperature. Because the values of v and u vary only gradually as pressure changes
at fixed temperature, the following approximations are reasonable for many engineering
calculations:

v1T, p2  vf 1T 2                                                          (3.11)
u1T, p2  uf 1T 2
                                                                                

                                                                          (3.12)

That is, for liquids v and u may be evaluated at the saturated liquid state corresponding to
the temperature at the given state.

   An approximate value of h at liquid states can be obtained by using Eqs. 3.11 and 3.12
in the definition h  u  pv; thus

                                        h1T, p2  uf 1T 2  pvf 1T 2

This can be expressed alternatively as

h1T, p2  hf 1T 2  vf 1T 2 3 p  psat1T 2 4                                 (3.13)

where psat denotes the saturation pressure at the given temperature. The derivation is
left as an exercise. When the contribution of the underlined term of Eq. 3.13 is small,
the specific enthalpy can be approximated by the saturated liquid value, as for v and u.
That is

h1T, p2  hf 1T 2                                                          (3.14) 

   Although the approximations given here have been presented with reference to liquid
water, they also provide plausible approximations for other substances when the only liquid
data available are for saturated liquid states. In this text, compressed liquid data are pre-
sented only for water (Tables A-5). Also note that Interactive Thermodynamics: IT does not
provide compressed liquid data for any substance, but uses Eqs. 3.11, 3.12, and 3.14 to return
liquid values for v, u, and h, respectively. When greater accuracy is required than provided
by these approximations, other data sources should be consulted for more complete property
compilations for the substance under consideration.

INCOMPRESSIBLE SUBSTANCE MODEL

As noted above, there are regions where the specific volume of liquid water varies little and   incompressible
the specific internal energy varies mainly with temperature. The same general behavior is       substance model
exhibited by the liquid phases of other substances and by solids. The approximations of
Eqs. 3.11­3.14 are based on these observations, as is the incompressible substance model
under present consideration.

   To simplify evaluations involving liquids or solids, the specific volume (density) is often
assumed to be constant and the specific internal energy assumed to vary only with temper-
ature. A substance idealized in this way is called incompressible.

   Since the specific internal energy of a substance modeled as incompressible depends only
on temperature, the specific heat cv is also a function of temperature alone

           du                   1incompressible2                          (3.15)
cv1T 2  dT

This is expressed as an ordinary derivative because u depends only on T.
94 Chapter 3 Evaluating Properties

   Although the specific volume is constant and internal energy depends on temperature only,
enthalpy varies with both pressure and temperature according to

                                    h1T, p2  u 1T 2  pv 1incompressible2                        (3.16)

   For a substance modeled as incompressible, the specific heats cv and cp are equal. This is
seen by differentiating Eq. 3.16 with respect to temperature while holding pressure fixed to
obtain

                                                 0h b  du
                                                 0T p dT

The left side of this expression is cp by definition (Eq. 3.9), so using Eq. 3.15 on the right
side gives

                                    cp  cv 1incompressible2                                     (3.17)

Thus, for an incompressible substance it is unnecessary to distinguish between cp and cv, and
both can be represented by the same symbol, c. Specific heats of some common liquids and
solids are given versus temperature in Tables A-19. Over limited temperature intervals the
variation of c with temperature can be small. In such instances, the specific heat c can be
treated as constant without a serious loss of accuracy.

   Using Eqs. 3.15 and 3.16, the changes in specific internal energy and specific enthalpy
between two states are given, respectively, by

                                            T2                       1incompressible2           (3.18)
                                                                     1incompressible2           (3.19)
                                    u2  u1  c1T 2 dT

                                                           T1

                                    h2  h1  u2  u1  v1 p2  p12

                                            T2

                                               c1T 2 dT  v1 p2  p12

                                                           T1

If the specific heat c is taken as constant, Eqs. 3.18 and 3.19 become, respectively,

                                    u2  u1  c1T2  T12             (incompressible, constant c)  (3.20a)
                                    h2  h1  c1T2  T12  v1p2  p12                                (3.20b)

In Eq. 3.20b, the underlined term is often small relative to the first term on the right side and
then may be dropped.

3.4 Generalized Compressibility Chart

The object of the present section is to gain a better understanding of the relationship
among pressure, specific volume, and temperature of gases. This is important not only as
a basis for analyses involving gases but also for the discussions of the second part of the
chapter, where the ideal gas model is introduced. The current presentation is conducted
in terms of the compressibility factor and begins with the introduction of the universal
gas constant.
                                     3.4 Generalized Compressibility Chart 95

UNIVERSAL GAS CONSTANT, R                                                                          Measured data
                                                                                                   extrapolated to
Let a gas be confined in a cylinder by a piston and the entire assembly held at a con-         pv  zero pressure
                                                                                               T
                                                                                                                     T1
stant temperature. The piston can be moved to various positions so that a series of                                    T2

equilibrium states at constant temperature can be visited. Suppose the pressure and spe-                                  T3

cific volume are measured at each state and the value of the ratio pvT 1v is volume per                               T4

mole) determined. These ratios can then be plotted versus pressure at constant tempera- R

ture. The results for several temperatures are sketched in Fig. 3.10. When the ratios are

extrapolated to zero pressure, precisely the same limiting value is obtained for each curve.

That is,

                               pv    (3.21)                                                                                           p
                           lim  R
                           pS0 T                                                                Figure 3.10 Sketch

where R denotes the common limit for all temperatures. If this procedure were repeated for     of pvT versus pressure

other gases, it would be found in every instance that the limit of the ratio pvT as p tends    for a gas at several speci-
                                                                                               fied values of temperature.

to zero at fixed temperature is the same, namely R. Since the same limiting value is exhib-

ited by all gases, R is called the universal gas constant. Its value as determined experimen- universal gas constant

tally is

          R  8.314 kJ/kmol # K       (3.22)

Having introduced the universal gas constant, we turn next to the compressibility factor.

COMPRESSIBILITY FACTOR, Z                                                                      compressibility factor

The dimensionless ratio pvRT is called the compressibility factor and is denoted by Z.

That is,

                                 pv  (3.23)
                           Z

                                 RT

As illustrated by subsequent calculations, when values for p, v, R, and T are used in consis-
tent units, Z is unitless.

   With v  Mv (Eq. 1.11), where M is the atomic or molecular weight, the compressibility
factor can be expressed alternatively as

where                            pv  (3.24)
                           Z         (3.25)

                                 RT
                           R R

                                 M

R is a constant for the particular gas whose molecular weight is M. The unit for R is
kJ/kg # K.

   Equation 3.21 can be expressed in terms of the compressibility factor as

                           lim Z  1  (3.26)

                           pS0
96 Chapter 3 Evaluating Properties                100 K    35 K
                                             1.5
                                                           50 K
                                             1.0           60 K
                                        Z                  200 K
                                                           300 K

                       0.5

                            0                                         Figure 3.11 Variation of the compressibility
                                                  100                200 factor of hydrogen with pressure at constant

                                                  p (atm)            temperature.

                       That is, the compressibility factor Z tends to unity as pressure tends to zero at fixed
                       temperature. This can be illustrated by reference to Fig. 3.11, which shows Z for hydrogen
                       plotted versus pressure at a number of different temperatures. In general, at states of a gas
                       where pressure is small relative to the critical pressure, Z is approximately 1.

reduced pressure       GENERALIZED COMPRESSIBILITY DATA, Z CHART
and temperature
                       Figure 3.11 gives the compressibility factor for hydrogen versus pressure at specified values
generalized            of temperature. Similar charts have been prepared for other gases. When these charts are
compressibility chart  studied, they are found to be qualitatively similar. Further study shows that when the coor-
                       dinates are suitably modified, the curves for several different gases coincide closely when
                       plotted together on the same coordinate axes, and so quantitative similarity also can be
                       achieved. This is referred to as the principle of corresponding states. In one such approach,
                       the compressibility factor Z is plotted versus a dimensionless reduced pressure pR and
                       reduced temperature TR, defined as

                                                                  p  and  TR       T   (3.27)
                                                           pR  pc                  Tc

                       where pc and Tc denote the critical pressure and temperature, respectively. This results in a
                       generalized compressibility chart of the form Z  f ( pR, TR). Figure 3.12 shows experimen-
                       tal data for 10 different gases on a chart of this type. The solid lines denoting reduced

                       isotherms represent the best curves fitted to the data.

                          A generalized chart more suitable for problem solving than Fig. 3.12 is given in the

                       Appendix as Figs. A-1, A-2, and A-3. In Fig. A-1, pR ranges from 0 to 1.0; in Fig. A-2, pR
                       ranges from 0 to 10.0; and in Fig. A-3, pR ranges from 10.0 to 40.0. At any one tempera-
                       ture, the deviation of observed values from those of the generalized chart increases with

                       pressure. However, for the 30 gases used in developing the chart, the deviation is at most
                                                                                                 3.4 Generalized Compressibility Chart 97

             1.1

             1.0             TR = 2.00

             0.9
                                                                    TR = 1.50

             0.8

             0.7                                           TR = 1.30

Z = ­pR­vT­  0.6             TR = 1.20

                                                                                         Legend

             0.5                                                               Methane   Isopentane
                                                TR = 1.10                      Ethylene  n-Heptane
                                                                               Ethane    Nitrogen
             0.4                                                               Propane   Carbon dioxide
                                                                               n-Butane  Water

             0.3  TR = 1.00                                                    Average curve based on
                                                                               data on hydrocarbons

             0.2

       0.1
           0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0 4.5 5.0 5.5 6.0 6.5 7.0
                                                           Reduced pressure pR

 Figure 3.12 Generalized compressibility chart for various gases.

on the order of 5% and for most ranges is much less.1 From Figs. A-1 and A-2 it can be
seen that the value of Z tends to unity for all temperatures as pressure tends to zero, in
accord with Eq. 3.26. Figure A-3 shows that Z also approaches unity for all pressures at
very high temperatures.

   Values of specific volume are included on the generalized chart through the variable vRż ,
called the pseudoreduced specific volume, defined by

                                                                     v                                              pseudoreduced
                                                                                                         (3.28) specific volume
                                                           vRż  RTcpc

For correlation purposes, the pseudoreduced specific volume has been found to be prefer-

able to the reduced specific volume vR  vvc, where vc is the critical specific volume. Using

the critical pressure and critical temperature of a substance of interest, the generalized chart
can be entered with various pairs of the variables TR, pR, and vRż : 1TR, pR2, 1pR, vRż 2, or 1TR, vRż 2.
Tables A-1 list the critical constants for several substances.

   The merit of the generalized chart for evaluating p, v, and T for gases is simplicity cou-

pled with accuracy. However, the generalized compressibility chart should not be used as a
substitute for p­v­T data for a given substance as provided by a table or computer software.

The chart is mainly useful for obtaining reasonable estimates in the absence of more accurate

data.

   The next example provides an illustration of the use of the generalized compressibility

chart.

1To determine Z for hydrogen, helium, and neon above a TR of 5, the reduced temperature and pressure should be
calculated using TR  T(Tc  8) and pR  p( pc  8), where temperatures are in K and pressures are in atm.
98 Chapter 3 Evaluating Properties

  E X A M P L E 3 . 6 Using the Generalized Compressibility Chart

  A closed, rigid tank filled with water vapor, initially at 20 MPa, 520C, is cooled until its temperature reaches 400C. Using
  the compressibility chart, determine
  (a) the specific volume of the water vapor in m3/kg at the initial state.
  (b) the pressure in MPa at the final state.

  Compare the results of parts (a) and (b) with the values obtained from the superheated vapor table, Table A-4.

  SOLUTION

  Known: Water vapor is cooled at constant volume from 20 MPa, 520C to 400C.

  Find: Use the compressibility chart and the superheated vapor table to determine the specific volume and final pressure and
  compare the results.
  Schematic and Given Data:

               1.0                                                                     p1 = 20 MPa
                               Z1                                                      T1 = 520°C
                                                                                       T2 = 400°C
               0.5
                                                                                         Closed, rigid tank

                                                                1         TR = 1.3

                                                     2                    TR = 1.2

  Z = ­pR­vT­                          vR´  = 1.2                                                     Water
                                            v´R = 1.1                                                 vapor

                                                                          TR = 1.05                   Cooling

                                                pR2

                                                                                           Block of ice

               0                       0.5                          1.0

                                       pR                                                                       Figure E3.6

  Assumptions:

  1. The water vapor is a closed system.
  2. The initial and final states are at equilibrium.
  3. The volume is constant.

  Analysis:

  (a) From Table A-1, Tc  647.3 K and pc  22.09 MPa for water. Thus

                                                TR1       793      1.23,        pR1     20      0.91
                                                         647.3                         22.09

  With these values for the reduced temperature and reduced pressure, the value of Z obtained from Fig. A-1 is approximately
  0.83. Since Z  pvRT, the specific volume at state 1 can be determined as follows:

                                   v1       Z1  RT1      0.83 RT1
                                                 p1           Mp1

                                                         N#m
                                                     8314 kmol # K
                                            0.83 ±              kg              793 K           0.0152 m3/ kg

                                                      18.02               °       106  N   ˘
                                                              kmol          20         m2

  The molecular weight of water is from Table A-1.
                                                                          3.4 Generalized Compressibility Chart 99

    Turning to Table A-4, the specific volume at the initial state is 0.01551 m3/kg. This is in good agreement with the com-
pressibility chart value, as expected.

(b) Since both mass and volume remain constant, the water vapor cools at constant specific volume, and thus at constant vRż .
Using the value for specific volume determined in part (a), the constant vRż value is

                           vpc    a0.0152  m3 b a22.09        106  N   b
                           RTc             kg                      m2
                    vRż                                                     1.12
                                  a 8314   N   #  m
                                   18.02   kg  #  K  b  1647.3  K2

At state 2

                                  TR2       673         1.04
                                           647.3

Locating the point on the compressibility chart where vRż  1.12 and TR  1.04, the corresponding value for pR is about 0.69.

Accordingly

                                              p2  pc1 pR22  122.09 MPa2 10.692  15.24 MPa

Interpolating in the superheated vapor tables gives p2  15.16 MPa. As before, the compressibility chart value is in good
agreement with the table value.

 Absolute temperature and absolute pressure must be used in evaluating the compressibility factor Z, the reduced temper-

    ature TR, and reduced pressure pR.

 Since Z is unitless, values for p, v, R, and T must be used in consistent units.

EQUATIONS OF STATE

Considering the curves of Figs. 3.11 and 3.12, it is reasonable to think that the variation with
pressure and temperature of the compressibility factor for gases might be expressible as an equa-
tion, at least for certain intervals of p and T. Two expressions can be written that enjoy a theo-
retical basis. One gives the compressibility factor as an infinite series expansion in pressure:

             Z  1  B^ 1T 2 p  C^ 1T 2 p2  D^ 1T 2 p3  # # #                       (3.29)

where the coefficients B^ , C^, D^ , . . . depend on temperature only. The dots in Eq. 3.29 repre-

sent higher-order terms. The other is a series form entirely analogous to Eq. 3.29 but ex-

pressed in terms of 1v instead of p

                                B1T2 C1T2 D1T2                                    (3.30)
                    Z  1  v  v2  v3  # # #

Equations 3.29 and 3.30 are known as virial equations of state, and the coefficients                   virial equations
B^ , C^, D^ , . . . and B, C, D, . . . are called virial coefficients. The word virial stems from the

Latin word for force. In the present usage it is force interactions among molecules that are

intended.

   The virial expansions can be derived by the methods of statistical mechanics, and physi-

cal significance can be attributed to the coefficients: B v accounts for two-molecule inter-
actions, C v2 accounts for three-molecule interactions, etc. In principle, the virial coefficients

can be calculated by using expressions from statistical mechanics derived from considera-

tion of the force fields around the molecules of a gas. The virial coefficients also can be de-
termined from experimental p­v­T data. The virial expansions are used in Sec. 11.1 as a
point of departure for the further study of analytical representations of the p­v­T relation-

ship of gases known generically as equations of state.
100 Chapter 3 Evaluating Properties

                                    The virial expansions and the physical significance attributed to the terms making up the
                                expansions can be used to clarify the nature of gas behavior in the limit as pressure tends to
                                zero at fixed temperature. From Eq. 3.29 it is seen that if pressure decreases at fixed tem-
                                perature, the terms B^ p, C^p2, etc. accounting for various molecular interactions tend to de-
                                crease, suggesting that the force interactions become weaker under these circumstances. In
                                the limit as pressure approaches zero, these terms vanish, and the equation reduces to Z  1
                                in accordance with Eq. 3.26. Similarly, since volume increases when the pressure decreases

                         at fixed temperature, the terms B v, C v2, etc. of Eq. 3.30 also vanish in the limit, giving

                                Z  1 when the force interactions between molecules are no longer significant.

                       EVALUATING PROPERTIES USING
                       THE IDEAL GAS MODEL

                       As discussed in Sec. 3.4, at states where the pressure p is small relative to the critical pres-

                       sure pc (low pR) and /or the temperature T is large relative to the critical temperature Tc (high
                       TR), the compressibility factor, Z  pvRT, is approximately 1. At such states, we can assume
                       with reasonable accuracy that Z  1, or

ideal gas equation of                      pv  RT                (3.32)
state
                       Known as the ideal gas equation of state, Eq. 3.32 underlies the second part of this chapter
ideal gas model        dealing with the ideal gas model.

                          Alternative forms of the same basic relationship among pressure, specific volume, and
                       temperature are obtained as follows. With v  Vm, Eq. 3.32 can be expressed as

                                           pV  mRT               (3.33)

                       In addition, since v  vM and R  RM, where M is the atomic or molecular weight,

                       Eq. 3.32 can be expressed as

                       or, with v  Vn, as  pv  RT                (3.34)
                                           pV  nRT               (3.35)

                       3.5 Ideal Gas Model

                       For any gas whose equation of state is given exactly by pv  RT, the specific internal en-
                       ergy depends on temperature only. This conclusion is demonstrated formally in Sec. 11.4. It
                       is also supported by experimental observations, beginning with the work of Joule, who showed
                       in 1843 that the internal energy of air at low density depends primarily on temperature. Fur-
                       ther motivation from the microscopic viewpoint is provided shortly. The specific enthalpy of
                       a gas described by pv  RT also depends on temperature only, as can be shown by com-
                       bining the definition of enthalpy, h  u  pv, with u  u(T ) and the ideal gas equation of
                       state to obtain h  u(T )  RT. Taken together, these specifications constitute the ideal gas
                       model, summarized as follows

                                           pv  RT                (3.32)
                                            u  u1T 2             (3.36)
                                            h  h1T 2  u1T 2  RT  (3.37)
                                                                                                 3.5 Ideal Gas Model 101

   The specific internal energy and enthalpy of gases generally depend on two independent        METHODOLOGY
properties, not just temperature as presumed by the ideal gas model. Moreover, the ideal gas     UPDATE
equation of state does not provide an acceptable approximation at all states. Accordingly,
whether the ideal gas model is used depends on the error acceptable in a given calculation.      To expedite the solutions
Still, gases often do approach ideal gas behavior, and a particularly simplified description is  of many subsequent
obtained with the ideal gas model.                                                               examples and end-of-
                                                                                                 chapter problems
   To verify that a gas can be modeled as an ideal gas, the states of interest can be located    involving air, oxygen (O2),
on a compressibility chart to determine how well Z  1 is satisfied. As shown in subsequent       nitrogen (N2), carbon
discussions, other tabular or graphical property data can also be used to determine the suit-    dioxide (CO2), carbon
ability of the ideal gas model.                                                                  monoxide (CO), hydrogen
                                                                                                 (H2), and other common
MICROSCOPIC INTERPRETATION. A picture of the dependence of the internal energy of                gases, we indicate in the
gases on temperature at low density can be obtained with reference to the discussion of          problem statements that
the virial equations in Sec. 3.4. As p S 0 (v S ), the force interactions between mole-          the ideal gas model
cules of a gas become weaker, and the virial expansions approach Z  1 in the limit. The          should be used. If not
study of gases from the microscopic point of view shows that the dependence of the in-           indicated explicity, the
ternal energy of a gas on pressure, or specific volume, at a specified temperature arises        suitability of the ideal gas
primarily because of molecular interactions. Accordingly, as the density of a gas decreases      model should be checked
at fixed temperature, there comes a point where the effects of intermolecular forces are         using the Z chart or other
minimal. The internal energy is then determined principally by the temperature. From the         data.
microscopic point of view, the ideal gas model adheres to several idealizations: The gas
consists of molecules that are in random motion and obey the laws of mechanics; the total
number of molecules is large, but the volume of the molecules is a negligibly small frac-
tion of the volume occupied by the gas; and no appreciable forces act on the molecules
except during collisions.

   The next example illustrates the use of the ideal gas equation of state and reinforces the
use of property diagrams to locate principal states during processes.

E X A M P L E 3 . 7 Air as an Ideal Gas Undergoing a Cycle

One pound of air undergoes a thermodynamic cycle consisting of three processes.
Process 1­2: constant specific volume
Process 2­3: constant-temperature expansion
Process 3­1: constant-pressure compression
At state 1, the temperature is 300K, and the pressure is 1 bar. At state 2, the pressure is 2 bars. Employing the ideal gas equa-
tion of state,
(a) sketch the cycle on p­v coordinates.
(b) determine the temperature at state 2, in K;
(c) determine the specific volume at state 3, in m3/ kg.

SOLUTION
Known: Air executes a thermodynamic cycle consisting of three processes: Process 1­2, v  constant; Process 2­3,
T  constant; Process 3­1, p  constant. Values are given for T1, p1, and p2.
Find: Sketch the cycle on p­v coordinates and determine T2 and v3.
102 Chapter 3 Evaluating Properties

    Schematic and Given Data:
                                                            p

                                                                          2
                                                                             p2 = 2 bars

     Assumptions:                                                  v=C                    T=C

 1. The air is a closed system.

     2. The air behaves as an ideal gas.

                                                                          1                           3
                                                               p1 = 1 bar
                                                                                p=C

                                                                                300 K                         600 K
                                                                                                                  v
                                                                                                                       Figure E3.7

  Analysis:

  (a) The cycle is shown on p­v coordinates in the accompanying figure. Note that since p  RTv and temperature is constant,
  the variation of p with v for the process from 2 to 3 is nonlinear.
  (b) Using pv  RT, the temperature at state 2 is

                                                       T2  p2v2R

  To obtain the specific volume v2 required by this relationship, note that v2  v1, so

                                                       v2  RT1p1

  Combining these two results gives

                                                               T2     p2  T1    a2 barsb 1300  K2     600  K
                                                                      p1          1 bar

  (c) Since pv  RT, the specific volume at state 3 is

                                                                                v3  RT3p3

  Noting that T3  T2, p3  p1, and R  RM

             v3                           RT2
                                          Mp1

                                                                      kJ
                                          8.314 kmol # K 600 K
                 ±                                                                             1 bar       103 N # M
                                                                      kg  a 1 bar b a 105 N/m2 b a 1 kJ b
                                                               28.97
                                                                      kmol

                  1.72 m3/kg

  where the molecular weight of air is from Table A-1.

   Table A-1 gives pc  37.3 bars, Tc  133 K for air. Therefore pR2  .053, TR2  4.51. Referring to A-1 the value of the

      compressibility factor at this state is Z  1. The same conclusion results when states 1 and 3 are checked. Accordingly,
      pv  RT adequately describes the p­v­T relation for gas at these states.

   Carefully note that the equation of state pv  RT requires the use of absolute temperature T and absolute pressure p.
                                                 3.6 Internal Energy, Enthalpy, and Specific Heats of Ideal Gases 103

3.6 Internal Energy, Enthalpy, and Specific
         Heats of Ideal Gases

For a gas obeying the ideal gas model, specific internal energy depends only on temperature.
Hence, the specific heat cv, defined by Eq. 3.8, is also a function of temperature alone. That is,

                                  cv1T  2    du  1ideal gas2              (3.38)
                                             dT

This is expressed as an ordinary derivative because u depends only on T.
   By separating variables in Eq. 3.38

                                           du  cv1T 2 dT                  (3.39)

On integration

                           T2                             1ideal gas2     (3.40)

                u1T22  u1T12  cv1T 2 dT

                                                   T1

   Similarly, for a gas obeying the ideal gas model, the specific enthalpy depends only on
temperature, so the specific heat cp, defined by Eq. 3.9, is also a function of temperature
alone. That is

                                            dh   1ideal gas2              (3.41)
                                  cp1T 2  dT

Separating variables in Eq. 3.41

                                           dh  cp1T 2 dT                  (3.42)

On integration

                           T2                             1ideal gas2     (3.43)

                h1T22  h1T12  cp1T 2 dT

                                                   T1

   An important relationship between the ideal gas specific heats can be developed by dif-
ferentiating Eq. 3.37 with respect to temperature

                                               dh  du  R
                                               dT dT

and introducing Eqs. 3.38 and 3.41 to obtain

                cp1T 2  cv1T 2  R 1ideal gas2                             (3.44)

On a molar basis, this is written as

                cp1T 2  cv1T 2  R 1ideal gas2                             (3.45)

Although each of the two ideal gas specific heats is a function of temperature, Eqs. 3.44 and
3.45 show that the specific heats differ by just a constant: the gas constant. Knowledge of
either specific heat for a particular gas allows the other to be calculated by using only the
gas constant. The above equations also show that cp  cv and cp 7 cv, respectively.
104 Chapter 3 Evaluating Properties

   For an ideal gas, the specific heat ratio, k, is also a function of temperature only

                                                k  cp1T 2      1ideal gas2                         (3.46)
                                                     cv1T 2

Since cp  cv, it follows that k  1. Combining Eqs. 3.44 and 3.46 results in

                                                cp1T 2         k  kR                               (3.47a)
                                                                  1                                (3.47b)
                                                                      (ideal gas)

                                                             R
                                                cv1T 2  k  1

Similar expressions can be written for the specific heats on a molar basis, with R being re-
placed by R.

USING SPECIFIC HEAT FUNCTIONS. The foregoing expressions require the ideal gas specific
heats as functions of temperature. These functions are available for gases of practical interest in
various forms, including graphs, tables, and equations. Figure 3.13 illustrates the variation of cp
(molar basis) with temperature for a number of common gases. In the range of temperature shown,
cp increases with temperature for all gases, except for the monatonic gases Ar, Ne, and He. For
these, cp is closely constant at the value predicted by kinetic theory: cp  25R. Tabular specific
heat data for selected gases are presented versus temperature in Tables A-20. Specific heats are
also available in equation form. Several alternative forms of such equations are found in the
engineering literature. An equation that is relatively easy to integrate is the polynomial form

                                           cp  a  bT  gT 2  dT 3  eT 4                             (3.48)
                                           R

Values of the constants , , , , and  are listed in Tables A-21 for several gases in the
temperature range 300 to 1000 K.

                                                                                       CO2
   7

                                                                                        H2O

   6

cp 5                                                                        O2

R                                                                           CO

   4                                       Air                              H2

   3
                                             Ar, Ne, He

   0                                 1000                    2000                            3000

                                     Temperature, K

 Figure 3.13 Variation of cpR with temperature for a number of gases

modeled as ideal gases.
                          3.7 Evaluating u and h Using Ideal Gas Tables, Software, and Constant Specific Heats 105

    for example. . . to illustrate the use of Eq. 3.48, let us evaluate the change in spe-

cific enthalpy, in kJ/kg, of air modeled as an ideal gas from a state where T1  400 K to a
state where T2  900 K. Inserting the expression for cp(T ) given by Eq. 3.48 into Eq. 3.43
and integrating with respect to temperature

 h2h1   R    T2
        M
               1a  bT  gT 2  dT 3  eT 42 d T

            T1

        R  c a1T2    T12    b  1T  2    T 122    g  1  T  3    T  3  2    d  1  T  4       T  4  2    e  1T  5    T 152 d
        M                   2      2             3        2       1       4        2          1       5      2

where the molecular weight M has been introduced to obtain the result on a unit mass basis.
With values for the constants from Table A-21

        h2    h1     8.314  e 3.6531900          4002          1.337      1  90022         140022
                     28.97                                     211023

                          3.294   190023       140023          1.913      1  900   2  4    140024
                          311026                               411029

                          0.2763   190025      140025 f           531.69 kJ/kg             
                          5110212

   Specific heat functions cv(T) and cp(T) are also available in IT: Interactive Thermodynamics
in the PROPERTIES menu. These functions can be integrated using the integral function of
the program to calculate u and h, respectively.  for example. . . let us repeat the im-
mediately preceding example using IT. For air, the IT code is

    cp = cp_T ("Air",T)
    delh = Integral(cp,T)

Pushing SOLVE and sweeping T from 400 K to 900 K, the change in specific enthalpy is
delh  531.7 kJ/kg, which agrees closely with the value obtained by integrating the spe-
cific heat function from Table A-21, as illustrated above. 

   The source of ideal gas specific heat data is experiment. Specific heats can be deter-
mined macroscopically from painstaking property measurements. In the limit as pressure
tends to zero, the properties of a gas tend to merge into those of its ideal gas model, so
macroscopically determined specific heats of a gas extrapolated to very low pressures may
be called either zero-pressure specific heats or ideal gas specific heats. Although zero-
pressure specific heats can be obtained by extrapolating macroscopically determined
experimental data, this is rarely done nowadays because ideal gas specific heats can readily
be calculated with expressions from statistical mechanics by using spectral data, which
can be obtained experimentally with precision. The determination of ideal gas specific heats
is one of the important areas where the microscopic approach contributes significantly to
the application of thermodynamics.

3.7 Evaluating u and h Using Ideal Gas
         Tables, Software, and Constant
         Specific Heats

Although changes in specific enthalpy and specific internal energy can be obtained by
integrating specific heat expressions, as illustrated above, such evaluations are more easily
conducted using the means considered in the present section.
106 Chapter 3 Evaluating Properties

USING IDEAL GAS TABLES

For a number of common gases, evaluations of specific internal energy and enthalpy changes
are facilitated by the use of the ideal gas tables, Tables A-22 and A-23, which give u and h
(or u and h) versus temperature.

   To obtain enthalpy versus temperature, write Eq. 3.43 as

                                              T

                                         h1T 2  cp1T 2 dT  h1Tref2

                                                          Tref

where Tref is an arbitrary reference temperature and h(Tref) is an arbitrary value for enthalpy
at the reference temperature. Tables A-22 and A-23 are based on the selection h  0 at

Tref  0 K. Accordingly, a tabulation of enthalpy versus temperature is developed through
the integral2

                                                T                           (3.49)

                                           h1T 2  cp1T 2 dT

                                                            0

Tabulations of internal energy versus temperature are obtained from the tabulated enthalpy
values by using u  h  RT.

   For air as an ideal gas, h and u are given in Table A-22 with units of kJ/kg. Values of mo-
lar specific enthalpy h and internal energy u for several other common gases modeled as ideal
gases are given in Tables A-23 with units of kJ/kmol. Quantities other than specific internal en-
ergy and enthalpy appearing in these tables are introduced in Chap. 6 and should be ignored
at present. Tables A-22 and A-23 are convenient for evaluations involving ideal gases, not only
because the variation of the specific heats with temperature is accounted for automatically but
also because the tables are easy to use.

    for example. . . let us use Table A-22 to evaluate the change in specific enthalpy,

in kJ/kg, for air from a state where T1  400 K to a state where T2  900 K, and compare
the result with the value obtained by integrating cp1T 2 in the example following Eq. 3.48. At
the respective temperatures, the ideal gas table for air, Table A-22, gives

                                                   kJ                   kJ
                                     h1    400.98     ,  h2  932.93 kg
                                                   kg

Then, h2  h1  531.95 kJ/kg, which agrees with the value obtained by integration in
Sec. 3.6. 

USING COMPUTER SOFTWARE

Interactive Thermodynamics: IT also provides values of the specific internal energy and en-
thalpy for a wide range of gases modeled as ideal gases. Let us consider the use of IT, first
for air, and then for other gases.

AIR. For air, IT uses the same reference state and reference value as in Table A-22, and the
values computed by IT agree closely with table data.  for example. . . let us recon-
sider the above example for air and use IT to evaluate the change in specific enthalpy from
a state where T1  400 K to a state where T2  900 K. Selecting Air from the Properties
menu, the following code would be used by IT to determine h (delh), in kJ/kg

    h1 = h_T("Air",T1)
    h2 = h_T("Air",T2)
    T1 = 400 // K
    T2 = 900 // K
    delh = h2 ­ h1

2The simple specific heat variation given by Eq. 3.48 is valid only for a limited temperature range, so tabular
enthalpy values are calculated from Eq. 3.49 using other expressions that enable the integral to be evaluated
accurately over wider ranges of temperature.
                                       3.7 Evaluating u and h Using Ideal Gas Tables, Software, and Constant Specific Heats 107

Choosing K for the temperature unit and kg for the amount under the Units menu, the results
returned by IT are h1  400.8, h2  932.5, and h  531.7 kJ/kg, respectively. As expected,
these values agree closely with those obtained previously. 

OTHER GASES. IT also provides data for each of the gases included in Table A-23. For
these gases, the values of specific internal energy u and enthalpy h returned by IT are de-
termined relative to different reference states and reference values than used in Table A-23.
Such reference state and reference value choices equip IT for use in combustion applications;
see Sec. 13.2.1 for further discussion. Consequently the values of u and h returned by IT for
the gases of Table A-23 differ from those obtained directly from the table. Still, the property
differences between two states remain the same, for datums cancel when differences are
calculated.

    for example. . . let us use IT to evaluate the change in specific enthalpy, in kJ/kmol,
for carbon dioxide (CO2) as an ideal gas from a state where T1  300 K to a state where T2 
500 K. Selecting CO2 from the Properties menu, the following code would be used by IT:

    h1 = h_T("CO2",T1)
    h2 = h_T("CO2",T2)
    T1 = 300 // K
    T2 = 500 // K
    delh = h2 ­ h1

Choosing K for the temperature unit and moles for the amount under the Units menu, the
results returned by IT are h1  3.935  105, h2  3.852  105, and ˘h  8238 kJ/kmol,
respectively. The large negative values for h1 and h2 are a consequence of the reference state
and reference value used by IT for CO2. Although these values for specific enthalpy at states
1 and 2 differ from the corresponding values read from Table A-23: h1  9,431 and
h2  17,678, which give ˘h  8247 kJ/kmol, the difference in specific enthalpy determined
with each set of data agree closely. 

ASSUMING CONSTANT SPECIFIC HEATS

When the specific heats are taken as constants, Eqs. 3.40 and 3.43 reduce, respectively, to

     u1T22  u1T12  cv1T2  T12                         (3.50)
     h 1T22  h 1T12  cp1T2  T12                       (3.51)

Equations 3.50 and 3.51 are often used for thermodynamic analyses involving ideal gases
because they enable simple closed-form equations to be developed for many processes.

   The constant values of cv and cp in Eqs. 3.50 and 3.51 are, strictly speaking, mean values
calculated as follows

      T2                                T2
         cv1T 2 dT                         cp1T 2 dT
cv   T1                           cp   T1
                    ,
      T2  T1                            T2  T1

However, when the variation of cv or cp over a given temperature interval is slight, little error
is normally introduced by taking the specific heat required by Eq. 3.50 or 3.51 as the arithmetic
average of the specific heat values at the two end temperatures. Alternatively, the specific
heat at the average temperature over the interval can be used. These methods are particularly
convenient when tabular specific heat data are available, as in Tables A-20, for then the
constant specific heat values often can be determined by inspection.

   The next example illustrates the use of the ideal gas tables, together with the closed system
energy balance.
108 Chapter 3 Evaluating Properties

    E X A M P L E 3 . 8 Using the Energy Balance and Ideal Gas Tables

    A piston­cylinder assembly contains 0.9 kg of air at a temperature of 300K and a pressure of 1 bar. The air is compressed
    to a state where the temperature is 470K and the pressure is 6 bars. During the compression, there is a heat transfer from the
    air to the surroundings equal to 20 kJ. Using the ideal gas model for air, determine the work during the process, in kJ.

    SOLUTION
    Known: 0.9 kg of air are compressed between two specified states while there is heat transfer from the air of a known
    amount.
    Find: Determine the work, in kJ.
    Schematic and Given Data:

  p

                2 p2 = 6 bars

                                                                           0.9 kg
                                                                             of
                                                           T2 = 470          air

                              1  T1 = 300K
                p1 = 1 bar               v

                                                                                       Figure E3.8

  Assumptions:

     1. The air is a closed system.
     2. The initial and final states are equilibrium states. There is no change in kinetic or potential energy.

 3. The air is modeled as an ideal gas.

  Analysis: An energy balance for the closed system is

                                                                     0  0

                                 ˘KE  ˘PE  ˘U  Q  W

  where the kinetic and potential energy terms vanish by assumption 2. Solving for W

                                 W  Q  ˘U  Q  m1u2  u12

  From the problem statement, Q  20 kJ. Also, from Table A-22 at T1  300 K, u1  214.07 kJ/ kg, and at T2  470K,
  u2  337.32 kJ/kg. Accordingly

                                 W  20  10.92 1337.32  214.072  130.9 kJ

  The minus sign indicates that work is done on the system in the process.

   Although the initial and final states are assumed to be equilibrium states, the intervening states are not necessarily equi-

      librium states, so the process has been indicated on the accompanying p­v diagram by a dashed line. This dashed line

      does not define a "path" for the process.

   Table A-1 gives pc  37.7 bars, Tc  133K for air. Therefore, at state 1, pR1  0.03, TR1  2.26, and at state 2, pR2 

      0.16, TR2  3.51. Referring to Fig. A-1, we conclude that at these states Z  1, as assumed in the solution.

   In principle, the work could be evaluated through  p dV, but because the variation of pressure at the piston face with vol-

      ume is not known, the integration cannot be performed without more information.
                                       3.7 Evaluating u and h Using Ideal Gas Tables, Software, and Constant Specific Heats 109

   The following example illustrates the use of the closed system energy balance, together
with the ideal gas model and the assumption of constant specific heats.

E X A M P L E 3 . 9 Using the Energy Balance and Constant Specific Heats

Two tanks are connected by a valve. One tank contains 2 kg of carbon monoxide gas at 77C and 0.7 bar. The other tank holds
8 kg of the same gas at 27C and 1.2 bar. The valve is opened and the gases are allowed to mix while receiving energy by
heat transfer from the surroundings. The final equilibrium temperature is 42C. Using the ideal gas model, determine (a) the
final equilibrium pressure, in bar (b) the heat transfer for the process, in kJ.

SOLUTION

Known: Two tanks containing different amounts of carbon monoxide gas at initially different states are connected by a valve.
The valve is opened and the gas allowed to mix while receiving a certain amount of energy by heat transfer. The final equi-
librium temperature is known.

Find: Determine the final pressure and the heat transfer for the process.

Schematic and Given Data:

Assumptions:

     1. The total amount of carbon monoxide gas is a closed system.                  Carbon       Valve    Carbon
                                                                                    monoxide             monoxide
 2. The gas is modeled as an ideal gas with constant cv.
                                                                                   2 kg, 77°C,           8 kg, 27°C,
     3. The gas initially in each tank is in equilibrium. The final state is          0.7 bar              1.2 bar
     an equilibrium state.
                                                                                      Tank 1               Tank 2
     4. No energy is transferred to, or from, the gas by work.
                                                                               Figure E3.9
     5. There is no change in kinetic or potential energy.

Analysis:

(a) The final equilibrium pressure pf can be determined from the ideal gas equation of state

                                 pf      mRTf
                                           V

where m is the sum of the initial amounts of mass present in the two tanks, V is the total volume of the two tanks, and Tf is
the final equilibrium temperature. Thus

                            pf     1m1  m22RTf
                                      V1  V2

Denoting the initial temperature and pressure in tank 1 as T1 and p1, respectively, V1  m1RT1p1. Similarly, if the initial tem-
perature and pressure in tank 2 are T2 and p2, V2  m2RT2p2. Thus, the final pressure is

                  pf         1m1  m22RTf                                          1m1  m22Tf
                        a m1RT1 b  a m2RT2 b                                  a m1T1 b  a m2T2 b
                        p1           p2                                       p1  p2

Inserting values

                            110 kg2 1315 K2
                  pf  12 kg2 1350 K2 18 kg2 1300 K2  1.05 bar
                                   
                        0.7 bar          1.2 bar
110 Chapter 3 Evaluating Properties

  (b) The heat transfer can be found from an energy balance, which reduces with assumptions 4 and 5 to give

                                                                                                                                     0

                                                                     ˘U  Q  W

  or

                                                                      Q  Uf  Ui

  Ui is the initial internal energy, given by
                                                               Ui  m1u1T12  m2u1T22

  where T1 and T2 are the initial temperatures of the CO in tanks 1 and 2, respectively. The final internal energy is Uf
                                                                 Uf  1m1  m22 u1Tf2

  Introducing these expressions for internal energy, the energy balance becomes

                                                   Q  m1 3 u1Tf2  u1T12 4  m2 3 u1Tf2  u1T22 4
  Since the specific heat cv is constant (assumption 2)

                                                        Q  m1cv1Tf  T12  m2cv1Tf  T22
  Evaluating cv as the mean of the values listed in Table A-20 at 300 K and 350 K, cv  0.745 kJ/kg # K. Hence

  Q    12  kg2 a0.745    kJ    b     1315  K    350  K2    18  kg2 a0.745                                                                 kJ    b  1315  K    300  K2    37.25  kJ
                       kg # K                                                                                                           kg # K

  The plus sign indicates that the heat transfer is into the system.

   By referring to a generalized compressibility chart, it can be verified that the ideal gas equation of state is appropriate for

      CO in this range of temperature and pressure. Since the specific heat cv of CO varies little over the temperature interval
      from 300 to 350 K (Table A-20), it can be treated as constant with acceptable accuracy.

   As an exercise, evaluate Q using specific internal energy values from the ideal gas table for CO, Table A-23. Observe that

      specific internal energy is given in Table A-23 with units of kJ/kmol.

              The next example illustrates the use of software for problem solving with the ideal gas
           model. The results obtained are compared with those determined assuming the specific heat
           cv is constant.

  E X A M P L E 3 . 1 0 Using the Energy Balance and Software

  One kmol of carbon dioxide gas (CO2) in a piston­cylinder assembly undergoes a constant-pressure process at 1 bar from
  T1  300 K to T2. Plot the heat transfer to the gas, in kJ, versus T2 ranging from 300 to 1500 K. Assume the ideal gas model,
  and determine the specific internal energy change of the gas using

  (a) u data from IT.
  (b) a constant cv evaluated at T1 from IT.

  SOLUTION

  Known: One kmol of CO2 undergoes a constant-pressure process in a piston­cylinder assembly. The initial temperature, T1,
  and the pressure are known.

  Find: Plot the heat transfer versus the final temperature, T2. Use the ideal gas model and evaluate ˘u using (a) u data from
  IT, (b) constant cv evaluated at T1 from IT.
                  3.7 Evaluating u and h Using Ideal Gas Tables, Software, and Constant Specific Heats 111

Schematic and Given Data:

          Carbon           T1 = 300 K   Assumptions:
         dioxide            n = 1 kmol
                                        1. The carbon dioxide is a closed system.
 Figure E3.10a              p = 1 bar   2. The process occurs at constant pressure.
                                        3. The carbon dioxide behaves as an ideal gas.
                                        4. Kinetic and potential energy effects are negligible.

Analysis: The heat transfer is found using the closed system energy balance, which reduces to

                                                    U2  U1  Q  W

Using Eq. 2.17 at constant pressure (assumption 2)

                                                        W  p 1V2  V12  pn1v2  v12
Then, with ˘U  n1u2  u12, the energy balance becomes

                                                         n1u2  u12  Q  pn1v2  v12

Solving for Q

                                        Q  n 3 1u2  u12  p 1v2  v12 4

     With pv  RT, this becomes

                                        Q  n 3 1u2  u12  R1T2  T12 4

The object is to plot Q versus T2 for each of the following cases: (a) values for u1 and u2 at T1 and T2, respectively, are pro-
vided by IT, (b) Eq. 3.50 is used on a molar basis, namely

                                        u2  u1  cv1T2  T12

where the value of cv is evaluated at T1 using IT.
    The IT program follows, where Rbar denotes R, cvb denotes cv, and ubar1 and ubar2 denote u1 and u2, respectively.

// Using the Units menu, select "mole" for the substance amount.
// Given Data
T1 = 300 // K
T2 = 1500 // K
n = 1 // kmol
Rbar = 8.314 // kJ/kmol # K

// (a) Obtain molar specific internal energy data using IT.
ubar1 = u_T("CO2", T1)
ubar2 = u_T("CO2", T2)
Qa = n*(ubar2 ­ ubar1) + n*Rbar*(T2 ­ T1)

    // (b) Use Eq. 3.50 with cv evaluated at T1.
    cvb = cv_T("CO2", T1)
    Qb = n*cvb*(T2 ­ T1) + n*Rbar*(T2 ­ T1)

Use the Solve button to obtain the solution for the sample case of T2  1500 K. For part (a), the program returns Qa  6.16 
104 kJ. The solution can be checked using CO2 data from Table A-23, as follows:

                           Qa  n 3 1u2  u12  R1T2  T12 4
                                11 kmol2 3 158,606  69392 kJ/kmol  18.314 kJ/kmol # K211500  3002 K4
                                61,644 kJ
112 Chapter 3 Evaluating Properties

Thus, the result obtained using CO2 data from Table A-23 is in close agreement with the computer solution for the sample
case. For part (b), IT returns cv  28.95 kJ/kmol # K at T1, giving Qb  4.472  104 kJ when T2  1500 K. This value agrees

with the result obtained using the specific heat cv at 300 K from Table A-20, as can be verified.
    Now that the computer program has been verified, use the Explore button to vary T2 from 300 to 1500 K in steps of 10.

Construct the following graph using the Graph button:

       70,000

       60,000  internal energy data
       50,000  cv at T1

Q, kJ  40,000

       30,000

       20,000

       10,000

       0
       300 500 700 900 1100 1300 1500

                   T2, K

                                        Figure E3.10b

         As expected, the heat transfer is seen to increase as the final temperature increases. From the plots, we also see that using

 constant cv evaluated at T1 for calculating ˘u, and hence Q, can lead to considerable error when compared to using u data. The

     two solutions compare favorably up to about 500 K, but differ by approximately 27% when heating to a temperature of 1500 K.

 Alternatively, this expression for Q can be written as

                                                        Q  n 3 1u2  pv22  1u1  pv12 4
    Introducing h  u  pv, the expression for Q becomes

                                                                   Q  n1h2  h12

 It is left as an exercise to verify that more accurate results in part (b) would be obtained using cv evaluated at Taverage 

    (T1  T2)2.

               3.8 Polytropic Process of an Ideal Gas
               Recall that a polytropic process of a closed system is described by a pressure­volume rela-
               tionship of the form

                                       pV n  constant                                         (3.52)

               where n is a constant (Sec. 2.2). For a polytropic process between two states

                                       p1V  n     p2V  n
                                            1          2

               or

                                       p2      a  V1    n                                     (3.53)

                                       p1         V2  b

               The exponent n may take on any value from  to , depending on the particular process.
               When n  0, the process is an isobaric (constant-pressure) process, and when n  , the
               process is an isometric (constant-volume) process.
                                                                                        3.8 Polytropic Process of an Ideal Gas 113

For a polytropic process

                              2 p dV  p2V2  p1V1                     1n 12              (3.54)
                                                  1n
                               1

for any exponent n except n  1. When n  1,

                               2   p  dV          p1V1  ln  V2       1n  12             (3.55)
                                1                           V1

Example 2.1 provides the details of these integrations.
   Equations 3.52 through 3.55 apply to any gas (or liquid) undergoing a polytropic process.

When the additional idealization of ideal gas behavior is appropriate, further relations can
be derived. Thus, when the ideal gas equation of state is introduced into Eqs. 3.53, 3.54, and
3.55, the following expressions are obtained, respectively

                         T2       p2    1n   12n       V1    n    1

                         T1    a  p1  b             a  V2  b         1ideal gas2        (3.56)
                                                                     1ideal gas, n 12   (3.57)
                 2 p dV  mR 1T2  T12                                 1ideal gas, n  12  (3.58)
                      1               1n

                2 p dV  mRT ln V2
                      1                     V1

For an ideal gas, the case n  1 corresponds to an isothermal (constant-temperature) process,
as can readily be verified. In addition, when the specific heats are constant, the value of the
exponent n corresponding to an adiabatic polytropic process of an ideal gas is the specific
heat ratio k (see discussion of Eq. 6.47).

   Example 3.11 illustrates the use of the closed system energy balance for a system con-
sisting of an ideal gas undergoing a polytropic process.

E X A M P L E 3 . 1 1 Polytropic Process of Air as an Ideal Gas

Air undergoes a polytropic compression in a piston­cylinder assembly from p1  1 bar, T1  22C to p2  5 bars. Employing
the ideal gas model, determine the work and heat transfer per unit mass, in kJ/kg, if n  1.3.

SOLUTION
Known: Air undergoes a polytropic compression process from a given initial state to a specified final pressure.
Find: Determine the work and heat transfer, each in kJ/kg.
Schematic and Given Data:

      p                                                                                 Assumptions:
                   2
                                                                                        1. The air is a closed system.
5 bars                                                                                  2. The air behaves as an ideal
                                                                                        gas.
                         pv1.3 = constant                                Air            3. The compression is
                                    1                                                   polytropic with n  1.3.
         1 bar                                             v         p1 = 1 bar         4. There is no change in
                                                                     T1 = 22C           kinetic or potential energy.
                                                                     p2 = 5 bars
                                                                                         Figure E3.11
114 Chapter 3 Evaluating Properties

Analysis: The work can be evaluated in this case from the expression

                                                          2

                                                       W  p dV

                                                                    1

With Eq. 3.57

                                                       W       R1T2  T12
                                                       m          1n

The temperature at the final state, T2, is required. This can be evaluated from Eq. 3.56

                          T2              T1  a  p2   1n12n    295  K  a  5   11.3121.3    428°K
                                                 p1
                                                     b                    1  b

The work is then

                  W    R1T2  T12              a 8.314    kJ    b  a  428°K  295°K          b    127.2  kJ/kg
                  m       1n                   28.97   kg # K             1  1.3

The heat transfer can be evaluated from an energy balance. Thus

                  Q    W             1u2    u12      127.2        1306.53      210.492        31.16  kJ/kg
                  m    m

where the specific internal energy values are obtained from Table A-22.

 The states visited in the polytropic compression process are shown by the curve on the accompanying p­v diagram. The

    magnitude of the work per unit of mass is represented by the shaded area below the curve.

Chapter Summary and Study Guide

In this chapter, we have considered property relations for a            The following checklist provides a study guide for this
broad range of substances in tabular, graphical, and equation        chapter. When your study of the text and end-of-chapter
form. Primary emphasis has been placed on the use of tabu-           exercises has been completed you should be able to
lar data, but computer retrieval also has been considered.
                                                                      write out the meanings of the terms listed in the margins
   A key aspect of thermodynamic analysis is fixing states.             throughout the chapter and understand each of the related
This is guided by the state principle for pure, simple com-             concepts. The subset of key concepts listed below is
pressible systems, which indicates that the intensive state is          particularly important in subsequent chapters.
fixed by the values of two independent, intensive properties.
Another important aspect of thermodynamic analysis is lo-             retrieve property data from Tables A-1 through A-23,
cating principal states of processes on appropriate diagrams:           using the state principle to fix states and linear interpola-
p­v, T­v, and p­T diagrams. The skills of fixing states and             tion when required.
using property diagrams are particularly important when solv-
ing problems involving the energy balance.                            sketch T­v, p­v, and p­T diagrams, and locate principal
                                                                        states on such diagrams.
   The ideal gas model is introduced in the second part of
this chapter, using the compressibility factor as a point of          apply the closed system energy balance with property
departure. This arrangement emphasizes the limitations of the           data.
ideal gas model. When it is appropriate to use the ideal gas
model, we stress that specific heats generally vary with              evaluate the properties of two-phase, liquid­vapor
temperature, and feature the use of the ideal gas tables in             mixtures using Eqs. 3.1, 3.2, 3.6, and 3.7.
problem solving.
                                                                      estimate the properties of liquids using Eqs. 3.11, 3.12,
                                                                        and 3.14.
 apply the incompressible substance model.                                             Problems: Developing Engineering Skills 115
 use the generalized compressibility chart to relate p­v­T
                                                                       is warranted, and appropriately using ideal gas table
   data of gases.                                                      data or constant specific heat data to determine u
                                                                       and h.
 apply the ideal gas model for thermodynamic analysis,
   including determining when use of the ideal gas model

Key Engineering Concepts

state principle p. 69  saturation                                      two-phase, liquid­vapor  enthalpy p. 83
simple compressible       temperature p. 73                               mixture p. 75         specific heats p. 91
                                                                                                ideal gas model p. 100
   system p. 69        saturation pressure p. 73                       quality p. 75
p­v­T surface p. 70    p­v diagram p. 73                               superheated
phase diagram p. 72    T­v diagram p. 73
                                                                          vapor p. 75

Exercises: Things Engineers Think About

1. Why does food cook more quickly in a pressure cooker than           volume v, can the mass, in kg, of each phase be determined?
in water boiling in an open container?                                 Repeat for a three-phase, solid­liquid­vapor mixture in equilib-
                                                                       rium at T, v.
2. If water contracted on freezing, what implications might this
have for aquatic life?                                                 11. By inspection of Fig. 3.9, what are the values of cp for water
                                                                       at 500C and pressures equal to 40 MPa, 20 MPa, 10 MPa,
3. Why do frozen water pipes tend to burst?                            and 1 MPa? Is the ideal gas model appropriate at any of these
                                                                       states?
4. Referring to a phase diagram, explain why a film of liquid
water forms under the blade of an ice skate.                           12. Devise a simple experiment to determine the specific heat,
                                                                       cp, of liquid water at atmospheric pressure and room tempera-
5. Can water at 40C exist as a vapor? As a liquid?                     ture.

6. What would be the general appearance of constant-volume             13. If a block of aluminum and a block of steel having equal
lines in the vapor and liquid regions of the phase diagram?            volumes each received the same energy input by heat transfer,
                                                                       which block would experience the greater temperature
7. Are the pressures listed in the tables in the Appendix absolute     increase?
pressures or gage pressures?
                                                                       14. Under what circumstances is the following statement cor-
8. The specific internal energy is arbitrarily set to zero in Table    rect? Equal molar amounts of two different gases at the same
A-2 for saturated liquid water at 0.01C. If the reference value        temperature, placed in containers of equal volume, have the same
for u at this reference state were specified differently, would there  pressure.
be any significant effect on thermodynamic analyses using u
and h?                                                                 15. Estimate the mass of air contained in a bicycle tire.

9. For liquid water at 20C and 1.0 MPa, what percent difference        16. Specific internal energy and enthalpy data for water vapor
would there be if its specific enthalpy were evaluated using           are provided in two tables: Tables A-4 and A-23. When would
Eq. 3.14 instead of Eq. 3.13?                                          Table A-23 be used?

10. For a system consisting of 1 kg of a two-phase, liquid­vapor
mixture in equilibrium at a known temperature T and specific

Problems: Developing Engineering Skills

Using p­v­T Data                                                          (d) T  160C, p  4.8 bar.
                                                                          (e) T  12C, p  1 bar.
3.1 Determine the phase or phases in a system consisting of
   H2O at the following conditions and sketch p­v and T­v dia-         3.2 Plot the pressure­temperature relationship for two-phase
   grams showing the location of each state.                              liquid­vapor mixtures of water from the triple point tem-
                                                                          perature to the critical point temperature. Use a logarithmic
   (a) p  5 bar, T  151.9C.                                               scale for pressure, in bar, and a linear scale for temperature,
   (b) p  5 bar, T  200C.                                                 in C.
   (c) T  200C, p  2.5 MPa.
116 Chapter 3 Evaluating Properties

3.3 For H2O, plot the following on a p­v diagram drawn to                 the final mass of vapor in the tank, in kg, and the final pres-
   scale on log­log coordinates:                                          sure, in bar.

   (a) the saturated liquid and saturated vapor lines from the triple  3.15 Two thousand kg of water, initially a saturated liquid at
        point to the critical point, with pressure in MPa and spe-        150C, is heated in a closed, rigid tank to a final state where
        cific volume in m3/kg.                                            the pressure is 2.5 MPa. Determine the final temperature, in
                                                                          C, the volume of the tank, in m3, and sketch the process on
   (b) lines of constant temperature at 100 and 300C.                     T­v and p­v diagrams.

3.4 Plot the pressure­temperature relationship for two-phase           3.16 Steam is contained in a closed rigid container with a vol-
   liquid­vapor mixtures of (a) Refrigerant 134a, (b) ammonia,            ume of 1 m3. Initially, the pressure and temperature of the steam
   (c) Refrigerant 22 from a temperature of 40 to 100C, with              are 7 bar and 500C, respectively. The temperature drops as a
   pressure in kPa and temperature in C. Use a logarithmic scale          result of heat transfer to the surroundings. Determine the tem-
   for pressure and a linear scale for temperature.                       perature at which condensation first occurs, in C, and the
                                                                          fraction of the total mass that has condensed when the pres-
3.5 Determine the quality of a two-phase liquid­vapor mixture             sure reaches 0.5 bar. What is the volume, in m3, occupied by
   of                                                                     saturated liquid at the final state?

   (a) H2O at 20C with a specific volume of 20 m3/kg.                  3.17 Water vapor is heated in a closed, rigid tank from satu-
   (b) Propane at 15 bar with a specific volume of 0.02997 m3/kg.         rated vapor at 160C to a final temperature of 400C. Deter-
   (c) Refrigerant 134a at 60C with a specific volume of 0.001            mine the initial and final pressures, in bar, and sketch the
                                                                          process on T­v and p­v diagrams.
       m3/kg.
   (d) Ammonia at 1 MPa with a specific volume of 0.1 m3/kg.           3.18 Ammonia undergoes an isothermal process from an initial
                                                                          state at T1  80F and v1  10 ft3/lb to saturated vapor. De-
3.6 For H2O, plot the following on a p­v diagram drawn to                 termine the initial and final pressures, in lbf/in.2, and sketch
   scale on log­log coordinates:                                          the process on T­v and p­v diagrams.

   (a) the saturated liquid and saturated vapor lines from the triple  3.19 A two-phase liquid­vapor mixture of H2O is initially at a
        point to the critical point, with pressure in KPa and spe-        pressure of 30 bar. If on heating at fixed volume, the critical
        cific volume in m3/kg 150C                                        point is attained, determine the quality at the initial state.

   (b) lines of constant temperature at 300 and 560C.                  3.20 Ammonia undergoes a constant-pressure process at 2.5 bar
                                                                          from T1  30C to saturated vapor. Determine the work for the
3.7 Two kg of a two-phase, liquid­vapor mixture of carbon                 process, in kJ per kg of refrigerant.
   dioxide (CO2) exists at 40C in a 0.05 m3 tank. Determine
   the quality of the mixture, if the values of specific volume        3.21 Water vapor in a piston­cylinder assembly is heated at a
   for saturated liquid and saturated vapor CO2 at 40C are                constant temperature of 204C from saturated vapor to a pres-
   vf  0.896  103 m3/kg and vg  3.824  102 m3/kg,                         sure of .7 MPa. Determine the work, in kJ per kg of water
   respectively.                                                          vapor, by using IT.

3.8 Determine the mass, in kg, of 0.1 m3 of Refrigerant 134a           3.22 2 kg mass of ammonia, initially at p1  7 bars and
   at 4 bar, 100C.                                                        T1  180C, undergo a constant-pressure process to a final
                                                                          state where the quality is 85%. Determine the work for the
3.9 A closed vessel with a volume of 0.018 m3 contains 1.2 kg             process, kJ.
   of Refrigerant 22 at 10 bar. Determine the temperature, in C.
                                                                       3.23 Water vapor initially at 10 bar and 400C is contained
3.10 Calculate the mass, in kg, of 1 m3 of a two-phase liquid­            within a piston­cylinder assembly. The water is cooled at con-
   vapor mixture of Refrigerant 22 at 1 bar with a quality                stant volume until its temperature is 150C. The water is then
   of 75%.                                                                condensed isothermally to saturated liquid. For the water as
                                                                          the system, evaluate the work, in kJ/kg.
3.11 A two-phase liquid­vapor mixture of a substance has a
   pressure of 150 bar and occupies a volume of 0.2 m3. The masses     3.24 Two kilograms of Refrigerant 22 undergo a process for
   of saturated liquid and vapor present are 3.8 kg and 4.2 kg, re-       which the pressure­volume relation is pv1.05  constant. The
   spectively. Determine the mixture specific volume in m3/kg.            initial state of the refrigerant is fixed by p1  2 bar, T1  20C,
                                                                          and the final pressure is p2  10 bar. Calculate the work for the
3.12 Ammonia is stored in a tank with a volume of 0.21 m3.                process, in kJ.
   Determine the mass, in kg, assuming saturated liquid at 20C.
   What is the pressure, in kPa?                                       3.25 Refrigerant 134a in a piston­cylinder assembly under-
                                                                          goes a process for which the pressure­volume relation is
3.13 A storage tank in a refrigeration system has a volume of             pv1.058  constant. At the initial state, p1  200 kPa, T1 
   0.006 m3 and contains a two-phase liquid­vapor mixture of              10C. The final temperature is T2  50C. Determine the
   Refrigerant 134a at 180 kPa. Plot the total mass of refrigerant,       final pressure, in kPa, and the work for the process, in kJ per
   in kg, contained in the tank and the corresponding fractions of        kg of refrigerant.
   the total volume occupied by saturated liquid and saturated
   vapor, respectively, as functions of quality.

3.14 Water is contained in a closed, rigid, 0.2 m3 tank at an ini-
   tial pressure of 5 bar and a quality of 50%. Heat transfer oc-
   curs until the tank contains only saturated vapor. Determine
                                                                                    Problems: Developing Engineering Skills 117

Using u­h Data                                                           8 bar to 50C. For the refrigerant, determine the work and heat
                                                                         transfer, per unit mass, each in kJ/kg. Changes in kinetic and
3.26 Using the tables for water, determine the specified prop-           potential energy are negligible.
   erty data at the indicated states. Check the results using IT. In
   each case, locate the state by hand on sketches of the p­v and     3.35 Saturated liquid water contained in a closed, rigid tank is
   T­v diagrams.                                                         cooled to a final state where the temperature is 50C and the
                                                                         masses of saturated vapor and liquid present are 0.03 and
   (a) At p  3 bar, T  240C, find v in m3/kg and u in kJ/kg.             1999.97 kg, respectively. Determine the heat transfer for the
   (b) At p  3 bar, v  0.5 m3/kg, find T in C and u in kJ/kg.            process, in kJ.
   (c) At T  400C, p  10 bar, find v in m3/kg and h in kJ/kg.
   (d) At T  320C, v  0.03 m3/kg, find p in MPa and u in              3.36 Refrigerant 134a undergoes a process for which the
                                                                         pressure­volume relation is pvn  constant. The initial and
        kJ/kg.                                                           final states of the refrigerant are fixed by p1  200 kPa, T1 
   (e) At p  28 MPa, T  520C, find v in m3/kg and h in kJ/kg.            10C and p2  1000 kPa, T2  50C, respectively. Calculate
   (f) At T  100C, x  60%, find p in bar and v in m3/kg.                 the work and heat transfer for the process, each in kJ per kg
   (g) At T  10C, v  100 m3/kg, find p in kPa and h in kJ/kg.            of refrigerant.
   (h) At p  4 MPa, T  160C, find v in m3/kg and u in kJ/kg.
                                                                      3.37 A piston­cylinder assembly contains a two-phase
3.27 Determine the values of the specified properties at each of         liquid­vapor mixture of Refrigerant 22 initially at 24C with a
   the following conditions.                                             quality of 95%. Expansion occurs to a state where the pressure
                                                                         is 1 bar. During the process the pressure and specific volume
   (a) For Refrigerant 134a at T  60C and v  0.072 m3/kg,                are related by pv  constant. For the refrigerant, determine
        determine p in kPa and h in kJ/kg.                               the work and heat transfer per unit mass, each in kJ/kg.

   (b) For ammonia at p  8 bar and v  0.005 m3/kg, deter-             3.38 Five kilograms of water, initially a saturated vapor at
        mine T in C and u in kJ/kg.                                      100 kPa, are cooled to saturated liquid while the pressure is
                                                                         maintained constant. Determine the work and heat transfer for
   (c) For Refrigerant 22 at T  10C and u  200 kJ/kg, de-                the process, each in kJ. Show that the heat transfer equals the
       termine p in bar and v in m3/kg.                                  change in enthalpy of the water in this case.

3.28 A quantity of water is at 15 MPa and 100C. Evaluate the          3.39 One kilogram of saturated solid water at the triple point
   specific volume, in m3/kg, and the specific enthalpy, in kJ/kg,       is heated to saturated liquid while the pressure is maintained
   using                                                                 constant. Determine the work and the heat transfer for the
                                                                         process, each in kJ. Show that the heat transfer equals the
   (a) data from Table A-5.                                              change in enthalpy of the water in this case.
   (b) saturated liquid data from Table A-2.
                                                                      3.40 A two-phase liquid­vapor mixture of H2O with an initial
3.29 Plot versus pressure the percent changes in specific vol-           quality of 25% is contained in a piston­cylinder assembly as
   ume, specific internal energy, and specific enthalpy for water        shown in Fig. P3.40. The mass of the piston is 40 kg, and its
   at 20C from the saturated liquid state to the state where the         diameter is 10 cm. The atmospheric pressure of the surround-
   pressure is 300 bar. Based on the resulting plots, discuss the        ings is 1 bar. The initial and final positions of the piston are
   implications regarding approximating compressed liquid prop-          shown on the diagram. As the water is heated, the pressure
   erties using saturated liquid properties at 20C, as discussed in      inside the cylinder remains constant until the piston hits the
   Sec. 3.3.6.                                                           stops. Heat transfer to the water continues until its pressure is

3.30 Evaluate the specific volume, in m3/kg, and the specific                                    patm = 100 kPa
   enthalpy, in kJ/kg, of ammonia at 20C and 1.0 MPa.
                                                                      4.5 cm
3.31 Evaluate the specific volume, in m3/kg, and the specific                 1 cm
   enthalpy, in kJ/kg, of propane at 800 kPa and 0C.
                                                                                                  Q  Initial quality
Applying the Energy Balance                                           Diameter = 10 cm                 x1 = 25%  Figure P3.40

3.32 A closed, rigid tank contains 2 kg of water initially at 80C         Mass = 40 kg
   and a quality of 0.6. Heat transfer occurs until the tank con-
   tains only saturated vapor. Kinetic and potential energy effects
   are negligible. For the water as the system, determine the
   amount of energy transfer by heat, in kJ.

3.33 A two-phase liquid­vapor mixture of H2O, initially at
   1.0 MPa with a quality of 90%, is contained in a rigid, well-
   insulated tank. The mass of H2O is 2 kg. An electric resistance
   heater in the tank transfers energy to the water at a constant
   rate of 60 W for 1.95 h. Determine the final temperature of the
   water in the tank, in C.

3.34 Refrigerant 134a vapor in a piston­cylinder assembly un-
   dergoes a constant-pressure process from saturated vapor at
118 Chapter 3 Evaluating Properties

   3 bar. Friction between the piston and the cylinder wall is neg-     transfer coefficient. At the initial time, t  0, the tank and
   ligible. Determine the total amount of heat transfer, in J. Let      its contents are at the temperature of the surroundings.
   g  9.81 m/s2.                                                        Obtain a differential equation for temperature T in terms of
                                                                        time t and relevant parameters. Solve the differential equa-
3.41 Two kilograms of Refrigerant 134a, initially at 2 bar and          tion to obtain T(t).
   occupying a volume of 0.12 m3, undergoes a process at con-
   stant pressure until the volume has doubled. Kinetic and po-      Using Generalized Compressibility Data
   tential energy effects are negligible. Determine the work and
   heat transfer for the process, each in kJ.                        3.48 Determine the compressibility factor for water vapor at
                                                                        200 bar and 470C, using
3.42 Propane is compressed in a piston­cylinder assembly from
   saturated vapor at 40C to a final state where p2  6 bar and          (a) data from the compressibility chart.
   T2  80C. During the process, the pressure and specific vol-          (b) data from the steam tables.
   ume are related by pvn  constant. Neglecting kinetic and po-      3.49 Determine the volume, in m3, occupied by 40 kg of
   tential energy effects, determine the work and heat transfer per     nitrogen (N2) at 17 MPa, 180 K.
   unit mass of propane, each in kJ/kg.                              3.50 A rigid tank contains 0.5 kg of oxygen (O2) initially at
                                                                        30 bar and 200 K. The gas is cooled and the pressure drops to
3.43 A system consisting of 2 kg of ammonia undergoes a cy-             20 bar. Determine the volume of the tank, in m3, and the final
   cle composed of the following processes:                             temperature, in K.

Process 1­2: constant volume from p1  10 bar, x1  0.6 to             3.51 Five kg of butane (C4H10) in a piston­cylinder assembly
      saturated vapor                                                   undergo a process from p1  5 MPa, T1  500 K to p2  3
                                                                        MPa, T2  450 K during which the relationship between pres-
Process 2­3: constant temperature to p3  p1, Q23  228 kJ                sure and specific volume is pvn  constant. Determine the
                                                                        work, in kJ.
Process 3­1: constant pressure
                                                                     Working with the Ideal Gas Model
   Sketch the cycle on p­v and T­v diagrams. Neglecting kinetic      3.52 A tank contains 0.05 m3 of nitrogen (N2) at 21C and
   and potential energy effects, determine the net work for the
   cycle and the heat transfer for each process, all in kJ.             10 MPa. Determine the mass of nitrogen, in kg, using

3.44 A system consisting of 1 kg of H2O undergoes a power               (a) the ideal gas model.
   cycle composed of the following processes:                           (b) data from the compressibility chart.

Process 1­2: Constant-pressure heating at 10 bar from satu-             Comment on the applicability of the ideal gas model for
      rated vapor.                                                      nitrogen at this state.

Process 2­3: Constant-volume cooling to p3  5 bar, T3  160C.         3.53 Show that water vapor can be accurately modeled as an
                                                                        ideal gas at temperatures below about 60C.
Process 3­4: Isothermal compression with Q34  815.8 kJ.
                                                                     3.54 For what ranges of pressure and temperature can air be
Process 4­1: Constant-volume heating.                                   considered an ideal gas? Explain your reasoning.

   Sketch the cycle on T­v and p­v diagrams. Neglecting kinetic      3.55 Check the applicability of the ideal gas model for Refrig-
   and potential energy effects, determine the thermal efficiency.      erant 134a at a temperature of 80C and a pressure of

3.45 A well-insulated copper tank of mass 13 kg contains 4 kg           (a) 1.6 MPa.
   of liquid water. Initially, the temperature of the copper is 27C     (b) 0.10 MPa.
   and the temperature of the water is 50C. An electrical resis-
   tor of neglible mass transfers 100 kJ of energy to the contents   3.56 Determine the temperature, in K, of oxygen (O2) at 250 bar
   of the tank. The tank and its contents come to equilibrium.          and a specific volume of 0.003 m3/kg using generalized com-
   What is the final temperature, in C?                                 pressibility data and compare with the value obtained using the
                                                                        ideal gas model.
3.46 An isolated system consists of a 10-kg copper slab, ini-
   tially at 30C, and 0.2 kg of saturated water vapor, initially at  3.57 Determine the temperature, in K, of 5 kg of air at a pres-
   130C. Assuming no volume change, determine the final equi-           sure of 0.3 MPa and a volume of 2.2 m3. Verify that ideal gas
   librium temperature of the isolated system, in C.                    behavior can be assumed for air under these conditions.

3.47 A system consists of a liquid, considered incompress-           3.58 Compare the densities, in kg/m3, of helium and air, each
   ible with constant specific heat c, filling a rigid tank whose       at 300 K, 100 kPa. Assume ideal gas behavior.
   surface area is A. Energy transfer by work from a paddle
   wheel to the liquid occurs at a con#stant rate. Energy transfer   3.59 Assuming ideal gas behavior for air, plot to scale the
   by heat occurs at a rate given by Q  hA (T  T0), where               isotherms 300, 500, 1000, and 2000 K on a p­v diagram.
   T is the instantaneous temperature of the liquid, T0 is the
   temperature of the surroundings, and h is an overall heat
                                                                        Problems: Developing Engineering Skills 119

3.60 By integrating cp(T ) obtained from Table A-21, determine             of the gas in this temperature interval based on the measured
   the change in specific enthalpy, in kJ/kg, of methane (CH4)             data.
   from T1  320 K, p1  2 bar to T2  800 K, p2  10 bar.
   Check your result using IT.                                          3.66 A gas is confined to one side of a rigid, insulated
                                                                           container divided by a partition. The other side is initially
3.61 Show that the specific heat ratio of a monatomic ideal gas            evacuated. The following data are known for the initial
   is equal to 53.                                                         state of the gas: p1  5 bar, T1  500 K, and V1  0.2 m3.
                                                                           When the partition is removed, the gas expands to fill the
Using the Energy Balance with the Ideal Gas Model                          entire container, which has a total volume of 0.5 m3. As-
                                                                           suming ideal gas behavior, determine the final pressure, in
3.62 One kilogram of air, initially at 5 bar, 350 K, and 3 kg of           bar.
   carbon dioxide (CO2), initially at 2 bar, 450 K, are confined
   to opposite sides of a rigid, well-insulated container, as           3.67 A rigid tank initially contains 3 kg of air at 500 kPa, 290 K.
   illustrated in Fig. P3.62. The partition is free to move and            The tank is connected by a valve to a piston­cylinder assem-
   allows conduction from one gas to the other without energy              bly oriented vertically and containing 0.05 m3 of air initially
   storage in the partition itself. The air and carbon dioxide each        at 200 kPa, 290 K. Although the valve is closed, a slow leak
   behave as ideal gases. Determine the final equilibrium tem-             allows air to flow into the cylinder until the tank pressure falls
   perature, in K, and the final pressure, in bar, assuming constant       to 200 kPa. The weight of the piston and the pressure of the
   specific heats.                                                         atmosphere maintain a constant pressure of 200 kPa in the
                                                                           cylinder; and owing to heat transfer, the temperature stays con-
 Air       CO2                                                             stant at 290 K. For the air, determine the total amount of en-
 1 kg       3 kg                                                           ergy transfer by work and by heat, each in kJ. Assume ideal
5 bar      2 bar                                                           gas behavior.
350 K      450 K
                                                                        3.68 A piston­cylinder assembly contains 1 kg of nitrogen gas
Partition  Insulation   Figure P3.62                                       (N2). The gas expands from an initial state where T1  700 K
                                                                           and p1  5 bar to a final state where p2  2 bar. During the
3.63 Consider a gas mixture whose apparent molecular weight                process the pressure and specific volume are related by pv1.3 
   is 33, initially at 3 bar and 300 K, and occupying a volume of          constant. Assuming ideal gas behavior and neglecting kinetic
   0.1 m3. The gas undergoes an expansion during which the                 and potential energy effects, determine the heat transfer during
   pressure­volume relation is pV1.3  constant and the energy              the process, in kJ, using
   transfer by heat to the gas is 3.84 kJ. Assume the ideal gas
   model with cv  0.6  (2.5  104)T, where T is in K and cv                 (a) a constant specific heat evaluated at 300 K.
   has units of kJ/kg # K. Neglecting kinetic and potential energy         (b) a constant specific heat evaluated at 700 K.
   effects, determine                                                      (c) data from Table A-23.

   (a) the final temperature, in K.                                     3.69 Air is compressed adiabatically from p1  1 bar, T1 
   (b) the final pressure, in bar.                                         300 K to p2  15 bar, v2  0.1227 m3/kg. The air is then cooled
   (c) the final volume, in m3.                                            at constant volume to T3  300 K. Assuming ideal gas be-
   (d) the work, in kJ.                                                    havior, and ignoring kinetic and potential energy effects, cal-
                                                                           culate the work for the first process and the heat transfer for
3.64 Helium (He) gas initially at 2 bar, 200 K undergoes a poly-           the second process, each in kJ per kg of air. Solve the problem
   tropic process, with n  k, to a final pressure of 14 bar. De-           each of two ways:
   termine the work and heat transfer for the process, each in kJ
   per kg of helium. Assume ideal gas behavior.                            (a) using data from Table A-22.
                                                                           (b) using a constant specific heat evaluated at 300 K.
3.65 Two kilograms of a gas with molecular weight 28 are
   contained in a closed, rigid tank fitted with an electric resistor.  3.70 A system consists of 2 kg of carbon dioxide gas initially at
   The resistor draws a constant current of 10 amp at a voltage            state 1, where p1  1 bar, T1  300 K. The system undergoes
   of 12 V for 10 min. Measurements indicate that when equi-               a power cycle consisting of the following processes:
   librium is reached, the temperature of the gas has increased by
   40.3C. Heat transfer to the surroundings is estimated to occur       Process 1­2: constant volume to p2, p2  p1
   at a constant rate of 20 W. Assuming ideal gas behavior, de-
   termine an average value of the specific heat cp, in kJ/kg # K,      Process 2­3: expansion with pv1.28  constant

                                                                        Process 3­1: constant-pressure compression

                                                                           Assuming the ideal gas model and neglecting kinetic and
                                                                           potential energy effects,

                                                                           (a) sketch the cycle on a p­v diagram.
                                                                           (b) plot the thermal efficiency versus p2p1 ranging from 1.05

                                                                                to 4.
120 Chapter 3 Evaluating Properties

3.71 A closed system consists of an ideal gas with mass m and         3.72 Steam, initially at 5 MPa, 280C undergoes a polytropic
   constant specific heat ratio k. If kinetic and potential energy       process in a piston­cylinder assembly to a final pressure of
   changes are negligible,                                               20 MPa. Plot the heat transfer, in kJ per kg of steam, for
                                                                         polytropic exponents ranging from 1.0 to 1.6. Also investigate
   (a) show that for any adiabatic process the work is                   the error in the heat transfer introduced by assuming ideal gas
                                                                         behavior for the steam. Discuss.
W    mR1T2   T12
         1k

(b) show that an adiabatic polytropic process in which work
     is done only at a moving boundary is described by pVk 

     constant.

Design & Open Ended Problems: Exploring Engineering Practice

3.1D This chapter has focused on simple compressible sys-                region. What features of the phase behavior of solids are im-
   tems in which magnetic effects are negligible. In a report,           portant in the fields of metallurgy and materials processing?
   describe the thermodynamic characteristics of simple mag-             Discuss.
   netic systems, and discuss practical applications of this type
   of system.                                                         3.7D Devise an experiment to visualize the sequence of
                                                                         events as a two-phase liquid­vapor mixture is heated at con-
3.2D The Montreal Protocols aim to eliminate the use of vari-            stant volume near its critical point. What will be observed
   ous compounds believed to deplete the earth's stratospheric           regarding the meniscus separating the two phases when the
   ozone. What are some of the main features of these agreements,        average specific volume is less than the critical specific
   what compounds are targeted, and what progress has been               volume? Greater than the critical specific volume? What
   made to date in implementing the Protocols?                           happens to the meniscus in the vicinity of the critical point?
                                                                         Discuss.
3.3D Frazil ice forming upsteam of a hydroelectric plant can
   block the flow of water to the turbine. Write a report summa-      3.8D One method of modeling gas behavior from the micro-
   rizing the mechanism of frazil ice formation and alternative          scopic viewpoint is known as the kinetic theory of gases. Using
   means for eliminating frazil ice blockage of power plants. For        kinetic theory, derive the ideal gas equation of state and ex-
   one of the alternatives, estimate the cost of maintaining a           plain the variation of the ideal gas specific heat cv with tem-
   30-MW power plant frazil ice­free.                                    perature. Is the use of kinetic theory limited to ideal gas
                                                                         behavior? Discuss.
3.4D Much has been written about the use of hydrogen as a
   fuel. Investigate the issues surrounding the so-called hydrogen    3.9D Many new substances have been considered in recent
   economy and write a report. Consider possible uses of hydro-          years as potential working fluids for power plants or refriger-
   gen and the obstacles to be overcome before hydrogen could            ation systems and heat pumps. What thermodynamic property
   be used as a primary fuel source.                                     data are needed to assess the feasibility of a candidate sub-
                                                                         stance for possible use as a working fluid? Write a paper
3.5D A major reason for the introduction of CFC (chlorofluo-             discussing your findings.
   rocarbon) refrigerants, such as Refrigerant 12, in the 1930s was
   that they are less toxic than ammonia, which was widely used       3.10D A system is being designed that would continuously feed
   at the time. But in recent years, CFCs largely have been phased       steel (AISI 1010) rods of 0.1 m diameter into a gas-fired fur-
   out owing to concerns about depletion of the earth's stratos-         nace for heat treating by forced convection from gases at
   pheric ozone. As a result, there has been a resurgence of in-         1200 K. To assist in determining the feed rate, estimate the time,
   terest in ammonia as a refrigerant, as well as increased interest     in min, the rods would have to remain in the furnace to achieve
   in natural refrigerants, such as propane. Write a report outlin-      a temperature of 800 K from an initial temperature of 300 K.
   ing advantages and disadvantages of ammonia and natural re-
   frigerants. Consider safety issues and include a summary of        3.11D Natural Refrigerants­Back to the Future (see box
   any special design requirements that these refrigerants impose        Sec. 3.3). Although used for home appliances in Europe, hy-
   on refrigeration system components.                                   drocarbon refrigerants have not taken hold in the United States
                                                                         thus far owing to concerns about liability if there is an acci-
3.6D Metallurgists use phase diagrams to study allotropic                dent. Research hydrocarbon refrigerant safety. Write a report
   transformations, which are phase transitions within the solid         including at least three references.
Control Volume                                                       C
Analysis Using                                                       H
Energy                                                               A
                                                                     P
                                                                     T

                                                                     4 E

                                                                     R

E N G I N E E R I N G C O N T E X T The objective of this chapter is to                         chapter objective
develop and illustrate the use of the control volume forms of the conservation of mass and
conservation of energy principles. Mass and energy balances for control volumes are
introduced in Secs. 4.1 and 4.2, respectively. These balances are applied in Sec. 4.3 to
control volumes at steady state and in Sec. 4.4 for transient applications.

   Although devices such as turbines, pumps, and compressors through which mass flows
can be analyzed in principle by studying a particular quantity of matter (a closed system)
as it passes through the device, it is normally preferable to think of a region of space
through which mass flows (a control volume). As in the case of a closed system, energy
transfer across the boundary of a control volume can occur by means of work and heat. In
addition, another type of energy transfer must be accounted for--the energy accompany-
ing mass as it enters or exits.

4.1 Conservation of Mass for a
         Control Volume

In this section an expression of the conservation of mass principle for control volumes is
developed and illustrated. As a part of the presentation, the one-dimensional flow model is
introduced.

 4.1.1 Developing the Mass Rate Balance

The mass rate balance for control volumes is introduced by reference to Fig. 4.1, which shows

a control volume with mass flowing in at i and flowing out at e, respectively. When applied

to such a control volume, the conservation of mass principle states                            conservation of mass

time rate of change of        time rate of flow        time rate of flow

Ł mass contained within §  Ł of mass in across §  Ł of mass out across §

the control volume at time t        inlet i at time t                exit e at time t

   Denoting the mass contained within the control volume at time t by mcv(t), this statement
of the conservation of mass principle can be expressed in symbols as

                              dmcv     #     #                                         (4.1)
                               dt     mi    me

                                                                                                                     121
122 Chapter 4 Control Volume Analysis Using Energy

                                                                         Dashed line defines
                                                                          the control volume

                                                                               boundary

                                   Inlet i

                                                                      Exit e                   Figure 4.1 One-inlet, one-exit control volume.

                                   where       dmcvdt  is  the  time  rate    of  change          of  mass   within   the  control  volume,  and   #  and   #
                                                                                                                                                  mi       me

mass flow rates                    ar# e  the  i#nstantaneous   mass  flow    rates           at  the inlet  and  exit,  respectively.  As  for  the  symbols
mass rate balance                                                                  #                  #
                                   W and Q, the dots in the quantities mi and me denote time rates of transfer. In SI, all terms

                                   in Eq. 4.1 are expressed in kg/s. For a discussion of the development of Eq. 4.1, see box.

                                   In general, there may be several locations on the boundary through which mass enters or

                                   exits. This can be accounted for by summing, as follows

                                                                                  dmcv            a     #    a     #                                  (4.2)
                                                                                   dt                  mi         me
                                                                                                    i         e

                                      Equation 4.2 is the mass rate balance for control volumes with several inlets and exits.
                                   It is a form of the conservation of mass principle commonly employed in engineering. Other
                                   forms of the mass rate balance are considered in discussions to follow.

                                   DEVELOPING THE CONTROL VOLUME
                                   MASS BALANCE

                      Dashed line  For each of the extensive properties mass, energy, and entropy (Chap. 6), the control
                                   volume form of the property balance can be obtained by transforming the correspon-
                      defines the  ding closed system form. Let us consider this for mass, recalling that the mass of a
                                   closed system is constant.
                  control volume
                                      The figures in the margin show a system consisting of a fixed quantity of matter m
                      boundary     that occupies different regions at time t and a later time t  t. The mass under
                                   consideration is shown in color on the figures. At time t, the mass is the sum m 
mi        mcv(t)                   mcv(t)  mi, where mcv(t) is the mass contained within the control volume, and mi is
                                   the mass within the small region labeled i adjacent to the control volume. Let us study
Region i                           the fixed quantity of matter m as time elapses.

          Time t                      In a time interval t all the mass in region i crosses the control volume bound-
                                   ary, while some of the mass, call it me, initially contained within the control volume
          mcv(t + t)  me           exits to fill the region labeled e adjacent to the control volume. Although the mass
                      Region e     in regions i and e as well as in the control volume differ from time t to t  t, the
                                   total amount of mass is constant. Accordingly
          Time t + t

                                                                              mcv1t2  mi  mcv1t  ˘t2  me                                              (a)

                                   or on rearrangement

                                                                              mcv1t  ˘t2  mcv1t2  mi  me                                              (b)

                                   Equation (b) is an accounting balance for mass. It states that the change in mass of the
                                   control volume during time interval t equals the amount of mass that enters less the
                                   amount of mass that exits.
                                                                         4.1 Conservation of Mass for a Control Volume 123

Equation (b) can be expressed on a time rate basis. First, divide by t to obtain

                               mcv1t  ˘t2  mcv1t2  mi  me                                       (c)
                                           ˘t              ˘t ˘t

Then, in the limit as t goes to zero, Eq. (c) becomes Eq. 4.1, the instantaneous control
volume rate equation for mass

                                           dmcv      #      #                          (4.1)
                                            dt      mi     me

where  dm# cvdt  denotes  the  time  rate  of  change  of  mass  within  the  control  volume,  and
 #
mi and me are the inlet and exit mass flow rates, respectively, all at time t.

EVALUATING THE MASS FLOW RATE                                                                                                 Vn t

                                                #                                                       Volume V t
An expression for the mass flow rate m of the matter entering or exiting a control volume              of matter
can be obtained in terms of local properties by considering a small quantity of matter flowing
with velocity V across an incremental area dA in a time interval t, as shown in Fig. 4.2.                                          dA
Since the portion of the control volume boundary through which mass flows is not neces-                        A
sarily at rest, the velocity shown in the figure is understood to be the velocity relative to the
area dA. The velocity can be resolved into components normal and tangent to the plane con-              Figure 4.2 Illustra-
taining dA. In the following development Vn denotes the component of the relative velocity             tion used to develop an
normal to dA in the direction of flow.                                                                 expression for mass flow
                                                                                                       rate in terms of local
   The volume of the matter crossing dA during the time interval t shown in Fig. 4.2                   fluid properties.
is an oblique cylinder with a volume equal to the product of the area of its base dA and
its altitude Vn t. Multiplying by the density  gives the amount of mass that crosses dA
in time t

                                    amount of mass
                                 Ł crossing dA during §  r1Vn ˘t2 dA
                                  the time interval ˘t

Dividing both sides of this equation by t and taking the limit as t goes to zero, the in-
stantaneous mass flow rate across incremental area dA is

                                instantaneous rate
                               Ł of mass flow §  rVn dA

                                     across dA

When this is integrated over the area A through which mass passes, an expression for the
mass flow rate is obtained

                                      #           rVn dA                                        (4.3)

                                     m         A

Equation 4.3 can be applied at the inlets and exits to account for the rates of mass flow into
and out of the control volume.

 4.1.2 Forms of the Mass Rate Balance

The mass rate balance, Eq. 4.2, is a form that is important for control volume analysis. In
many cases, however, it is convenient to apply the mass balance in forms suited to particu-
lar objectives. Some alternative forms are considered in this section.
124 Chapter 4 Control Volume Analysis Using Energy

                              Area = A                                       e

                              Air V, T, v

                                                         Air compressor
                                           Air

                                                    i

                                                                                         Figure 4.3 Figure
                                                                                        illustrating the one-dimensional
                                                                                ­ + flow model.

one-dimensional flow          ONE-DIMENSIONAL FLOW FORM

  METHODOLOGY                 When a flowing stream of matter entering or exiting a control volume adheres to the fol-
  UPDATE                      lowing idealizations, the flow is said to be one-dimensional:

 In subsequent control         The flow is normal to the boundary at locations where mass enters or exits the control
 volume analyses, we rou-        volume.
 tinely assume that the
 idealizations of one-         All intensive properties, including velocity and density, are uniform with position (bulk
 dimensional flow are            average values) over each inlet or exit area through which matter flows.
 appropriate. Accordingly
 the assumption of one-           for example. . . Figure 4.3 illustrates the meaning of one-dimensional flow. The
 dimensional flow is not      area through which mass flows is denoted by A. The symbol V denotes a single value that
 listed explicitly in solved  represents the velocity of the flowing air. Similarly T and v are single values that represent
 examples.                    the temperature and specific volume, respectively, of the flowing air. 

                              When the flow is one-dimensional, Eq. 4.3 for the mass flow rate becomes

                                                     #        rAV      1one-dimensional flow2           (4.4a)
                                                    m

                              or in terms of specific volume

                                                     #        AV       1one-dimensional flow2           (4.4b)
                                                    m          v

volumetric flow rate          When area is in m2, velocity is in m/s, and specific volume is in m3/kg, the mass flow rate
                              found from Eq. 4.4b is in kg/s, as can be verified. The product AV in Eqs. 4.4 is the volumetric
                              flow rate. The volumetric flow rate is expressed in units of m3/s.

                                 Substituting Eq. 4.4b into Eq. 4.2 results in an expression for the conservation of mass
                              principle for control volumes limited to the case of one-dimensional flow at the inlet and
                              exits

                                           dmcv    a    AiVi       a   AeVe     1one-dimensional flow2  (4.5)
                                            dt           vi             ve
                                                     i              e

                              Note that Eq. 4.5 involves summations over the inlets and exits of the control volume. Each
                              individual term in either of these sums applies to a particular inlet or exit. The area, veloc-
                              ity, and specific volume appearing in a term refer only to the corresponding inlet or exit.
                                             4.1 Conservation of Mass for a Control Volume 125

STEADY-STATE FORM

Many engineering systems can be idealized as being at steady state, meaning that all            steady state
properties are unchanging in time. For a control volume at steady state, the identity of the
matter within the control volume changes continuously, but the total amount present at any
instant remains constant, so dmcvdt  0 and Eq. 4.2 reduces to

                      a   #    a      #                                    (4.6)
                         mi          me

                      i           e

That is, the total incoming and outgoing rates of mass flow are equal.
   Equality of total incoming and outgoing rates of mass flow does not necessarily mean that

a control volume is at steady state. Although the total amount of mass within the control vol-
ume at any instant would be constant, other properties such as temperature and pressure might
be varying with time. When a control volume is at steady state, every property is independ-
ent of time. Note that the steady-state assumption and the one-dimensional flow assumption
are independent idealizations. One does not imply the other.

INTEGRAL FORM

We consider next the mass rate balance expressed in terms of local properties. The total mass
contained within the control volume at an instant t can be related to the local density as
follows

                       mcv1t2  r dV                                        (4.7)

                               V

where the integration is over the volume at time t.
   With Eqs. 4.3 and 4.7, the mass rate balance Eq. 4.2 can be written as

   d

dt
                   r dV  a a rVn dAb  a a rVn dAb                          (4.8)

V                  i  A              i   eA        e

where the area integrals are over the areas through which mass enters and exits the control     mass flux
volume, respectively. The product Vn appearing in this equation, known as the mass flux,
gives the time rate of mass flow per unit of area. To evaluate the terms of the right side of
Eq. 4.8 requires information about the variation of the mass flux over the flow areas. The
form of the conservation of mass principle given by Eq. 4.8 is usually considered in detail
in fluid mechanics.

EXAMPLES

The following example illustrates an application of the rate form of the mass balance to a
control volume at steady state. The control volume has two inlets and one exit.

E X A M P L E 4 . 1 Feedwater Heater at Steady State

A feedwater heater operating at steady state has two inlets and one exit. At inlet 1, water vapor enters at p1  7 bar, T1 
200C with a mass flow rate of 40 kg/s. At inlet 2, liquid water at p2  7 bar, T2  40C enters through an area A2  25 cm2.
Saturated liquid at 7 bar exits at 3 with a volumetric flow rate of 0.06 m3/s. Determine the mass flow rates at inlet 2 and at
the exit, in kg/s, and the velocity at inlet 2, in m/s.
126 Chapter 4 Control Volume Analysis Using Energy

   SOLUTION
   Known: A stream of water vapor mixes with a liquid water stream to produce a saturated liquid stream at the exit. The states at
   the inlets and exit are specified. Mass flow rate and volumetric flow rate data are given at one inlet and at the exit, respectively.
   Find: Determine the mass flow rates at inlet 2 and at the exit, and the velocity V2.
   Schematic and Given Data:

       2                                           1

  A2 = 25 cm2                                  T1 = 200 °C          Assumption: The control volume shown on the accompanying
  T2 = 40 °C                                   p1 = 7 bar           figure is at steady state.
  p2 = 7 bar                                   m1 = 40 kg/s

                               3           Control volume

                                           boundary

                    Saturated liquid                                 Figure E4.1
                    p3 = 7 bar
                    (AV)3 = 0.06 m3/s

  Analysis:  The    principal  relations   to  be  employed    are  the  mass  rate  balance  (Eq.  4.2)  and  the  expression  #    AVv  (Eq.  4.4b).
                                                                                                                                m

  At steady state the mass rate balance becomes

                                                                     0

                                                               dmcv          ###
                                                                 dt       m1  m2  m3

                 #                                                    #      #        #
  Solving for m2                                                     m2     m3       m1

                                                                                

                           #
  The mass flow rate m1 is given. The mass flow rate at the exit can be evaluated from the given volumetric flow rate

                                                                         #     1AV23
                                                                        m3       v3

  where v3 is the specific volume at the exit. In writing this expression, one-dimensional flow is assumed. From Table A-3,
  v3  1.108  103 m3/kg. Hence

                                                      #             0.06 m3/s
                                                   m3  11.108  103 m3/kg2  54.15 kg /s

  The mass flow rate at inlet 2 is then

                                                    ###
                                                   m2  m3  m1  54.15  40  14.15 kg /s

  For  one-dimensional  flow   at  2,   #      A2V2 v2,    so
                                       m2

                                                                     V2      #    A2
                                                                            m2v2

  State 2 is a compressed liquid. The specific volume at this state can be approximated by v2  vf 1T22 (Eq. 3.11). From Table A-2
  at 40C, v2  1.0078  103 m3/kg. So

                                       V2      114.15    kg/s211.0078       103   m3/kg2  `  104  cm2  `    5.7  m/s
                                                                 25 cm2                       1   m2

   At steady state the mass flow rate at the exit equals the sum of the mass flow rates at the inlets. It is left as an exercise to

      show that the volumetric flow rate at the exit does not equal the sum of the volumetric flow rates at the inlets.
                                                                                                4.1 Conservation of Mass for a Control Volume 127

   Example 4.2 illustrates an unsteady, or transient, application of the mass rate balance. In
this case, a barrel is filled with water.

E X A M P L E 4 . 2 Filling a Barrel with Water

Water flows into the top of an open barrel at a constant mass flow rate of 7 kg/s. Water exits through a pipe near the base
                                                                                #
with  a  mass  flow  rate  proportional  to  the  height  of  liquid  inside:  me    1.4  L,  where  L  is  the  instantaneous  liquid  height,  in  m.

The area of the base is 0.2 m2, and the density of water is 1000 kg/m3. If the barrel is initially empty, plot the variation of

liquid height with time and comment on the result.

SOLUTION
Known: Water enters and exits an initially empty barrel. The mass flow rate at the inlet is constant. At the exit, the mass
flow rate is proportional to the height of the liquid in the barrel.
Find: Plot the variation of liquid height with time and comment.
Schematic and Given Data:

         mi = 30 lb/s

                           Boundary of            Assumptions:
                           control volume

                                                  1. The control volume is defined by the dashed line on the accompanying
                                                  diagram.

                                                  2. The water density is constant.

         L (ft)

A = 3 ft2                  me = 9L lb/s

                                                   Figure E4.2a

Analysis: For the one-inlet, one-exit control volume, Eq. 4.2 reduces to

                                                              dmcv       #          #
                                                               dt       mi         me

The mass of water contained within the barrel at time t is given by

                                                                  mcv1t2  rAL1t2

where  is density, A is the area of the base, and L(t) is the instantaneous liquid height. Substituting this into the mass rate
balance together with the given mass flow rates

                                                                d 1 rAL 2
                                                                           7  1.4L

                                                                   dt

Since density and area are constant, this equation can be written as

                                                              dL  a 1.4 b L  7
                                                              dt rA                  rA
128 Chapter 4 Control Volume Analysis Using Energy

  which is a first-order, ordinary differential equation with constant coefficients. The solution is

                               L  5  C exp a 1.4tb
                                                        rA

  where C is a constant of integration. The solution can be verified by substitution into the differential equation.
      To evaluate C, use the initial condition: at t  0, L  0. Thus, C  5.0, and the solution can be written as

                                              L  5.031  exp 11.4trA2 4

  Substituting r  1000 kg/m2 and A  0.2 m2 results in

                               L  5 31  exp 10.007t2 4

  This relation can be plotted by hand or using appropriate software. The result is

  Height, m

  0 20 40 60 80 100 120
                      Time, s

                                Figure E4.2b

  From the graph, we see that initially the liquid height increases rapidly and then levels out. After about 100 s, the height
  stays nearly constant with time. At this point, the rate of water flow into the barrel nearly equals the rate of flow out of the
  barrel. L S 5.

   Alternatively, this differential equation can be solved using Interactive Thermodynamics: IT. The differential equation can

      be expressed as

          der(L,t) + (1.4 * L)/(rho * A) = 7/(rho * A)
          rho = 1000 // kg/m3
          A = 0.2 // m2

      where der(L,t) is dLdt, rho is density , and A is area. Using the Explore button, set the initial condition at L  0, and
      sweep t from 0 to 200 in steps of 0.5. Then, the plot can be constructed using the Graph button.

             4.2 Conservation of Energy for a
                      Control Volume
             In this section, the rate form of the energy balance for control volumes is obtained. The
             energy rate balance plays an important role in subsequent sections of this book.

              4.2.1 Developing the Energy Rate Balance for a Control Volume
             We begin by noting that the control volume form of the energy rate balance can be derived
             by an approach closely paralleling that considered in the box of Sec. 4.1, where the control
             volume mass rate balance is obtained by transforming the closed system form. The present
                                                                                           4.2 Conservation of Energy for a Control Volume 129

                                    Energy transfers can occur

                           Q          by heat and work

                                            W

    Inlet i                                     ue  +  _V_e_2  +  gze
    mi                                                  2

                              Control                    me
                              volume
                                                Exit e
    ui  +  _V_i_2  +  gzi                                        ze
            2
zi

                                   Dashed line defines
                              the control volume boundary

                                                                          Figure 4.4 Figure used to develop Eq. 4.9.

development proceeds less formally by arguing that, like mass, energy is an extensive prop-
erty, so it too can be transferred into or out of a control volume as a result of mass cross-
ing the boundary. Since this is the principal difference between the closed system and con-
trol volume forms, the control volume energy rate balance can be obtained by modifying
the closed system energy rate balance to account for these energy transfers.

   Accordingly, the conservation of energy principle applied to a control volume states:

    time rate of change                     net rate at which net rate at which net rate of energy

           of the energy                    energy is being              energy is being           transfer into the

D contained within T  D transferred in T  D transferred out T  D control volume T

the control volume at by heat transfer                                         by work at          accompanying

                   time t                       at time t                        time t            mass flow

   For the one-inlet one-exit control volume with one-dimensional flow shown in Fig. 4.4
the energy rate balance is

                              dEcv     #     #     #   aui        Vi2    gzib     #  aue    V2e    gzeb       (4.9)
                               dt     Q     W     mi              2              me         2

                                                                                           ##
where Ecv denotes the energy of the control volume at time t. The terms Q and W account,
respectively, for the net rate of energy transfer by heat and work across the boundary of

the control volume at t. The underlined terms account for the rates of transfer of internal,

kinetic, and potential energy of the entering and exiting streams. If there is no mass flow

in or out, the respective mass flow rates vanish and the underlined terms of Eq. 4.9 drop

out. The equation then reduces to the rate form of the energy balance for closed systems:

Eq. 2.37.

EVALUATING WORK FOR A CONTROL VOLUME

Next, we will place Eq. 4.9 in an alternative form that is more convenient for subseq# uent ap-
plications. This will be accomplished primarily by recasting the work term W, which
represents the net rate of energy transfer by work across all portions of the boundary of the
control volume.

   Because work is always done on or by a control vol#ume where matter flows across the
boundary, it is convenient to separate the work term W into two contributions: One con-
tribution is the work associated with the fluid pressure as mass is introduced at inlets and
130 Chapter 4 Control Volume Analysis Using Energy

                                                                               #
           removed at exits. The other contribution, denoted by Wcv, includes all other work effects,
           such as those associated with rotating shafts, displacement of the boundary, and electrical
           effects.

              Consider the work at an exit e associated with the pressure of the flowing matter. Re-
           call from Eq. 2.13 that the rate of energy transfer by work can be expressed as the prod-
           uct of a force and the velocity at the point of application of the force. Accordingly, the
           rate at which work is done at the exit by the normal force (normal to the exit area in the
           direction of flow) due to pressure is the product of the normal force, peAe, and the fluid
           velocity, Ve. That is

                                            time rate of energy transfer                                                              (4.10)
                                           Ł by work from the control §  1 peAe2Ve

                                                   volume at exit e

           where pe is the pressure, Ae is the area, and Ve is the velocity at exit e, respectively. A sim-

           ilar expression can be written for the rate of energy transfer by work into the control volume

           at inlet i.                                                         #

           With these considerations, the work term W of the energy rate equation, Eq. 4.9, can be

           written as

                                                     ##                                                                               (4.11)
                                                    W  Wcv  1 peAe2 Ve  1 piAi2Vi

           where, in accordance with the sign convention for work, the term at the inlet has a negative

           sign because energy is transferred into the control volume there. A positive sign precedes the

           work term at the exit because energy is transferred out of the control volume there. With
           AV  m# v from Eq. 4.4b, the above expression for work can be written as

                                                          #     #         m# e1 peve2       #  1  pivi  2                             (4.12)
                                                         W     Wcv                         mi

                    #   and   #  are  the  mass          flow  rates      and  vi  and ve    are  the      specific volumes evaluated at
           where mi     and  me                                                    terms      #   pivi)           #
           the inlet                                                                         mi(                 me(
                             exit, respectively. In Eq. 4.12, the                                          and        peve)  account  for  the

           work associated with the pressure a# t the inlet and exit, respectively. They are commonly

flow work  referred to as flow work. The term Wcv accounts for all other energy transfers by work across

           the boundary of the control volume.

            4.2.2 Forms of the Control Volume Energy Rate Balance

           Substituting Eq. 4.12 in Eq. 4.9 and collecting all terms referring to the inlet and the exit
           into separate expressions, the following form of the control volume energy rate balance
           results

           dEcv          #        #         #       aui      pivi     Vi2         gzib      #  a  ue       peve       Ve2    gzeb     (4.13)
            dt          Qcv      Wcv       mi                         2                    me                         2

                                                           #
           The subscript "cv" has been added to Q to emphasize that this is the heat transfer rate over

           the boundary (control surface) of the control volume.

           The last two terms of Eq. 4.13 can be rewritten using the specific enthalpy h introduced

           in Sec. 3.3.2. With h  u  pv, the energy rate balance becomes

                             dEcv      #             #          #  a  hi    V2i        gzib        #    a  he    Ve2       gzeb       (4.14)
                              dt      Qcv           Wcv        mi           2                     me             2

           The appearance of the sum u  pv in the control volume energy equation is the principal
           reason for introducing enthalpy previously. It is brought in solely as a convenience: The al-
           gebraic form of the energy rate balance is simplified by the use of enthalpy and, as we have
           seen, enthalpy is normally tabulated along with other properties.
                                                                                               4.3 Analyzing Control Volumes at Steady State 131

   In practice there may be several locations on the boundary through which mass enters or
exits. This can be accounted for by introducing summations as in the mass balance. Ac-
cordingly, the energy rate balance is

           dEcv          #         #     a     #   ahi    Vi2    gzib     a     #  ahe      V2e    gzeb                   (4.15) energy rate balance
            dt          Qcv       Wcv         mi          2                    me           2
                                           i                               e

Equation 4.15 is an accounting balance for the energy of the control volume. It states that                                       METHODOLOGY
the rate of energy increase or decrease within the control volume equals the difference be-                                       UPDATE
tween the rates of energy transfer in and out across the boundary. The mechanisms of en-
ergy transfer are heat and work, as for closed systems, and the energy that accompanies the                                       Equation 4.15 is the most
mass entering and exiting.                                                                                                        general form of the con-
                                                                                                                                  servation of energy princi-
OTHER FORMS                                                                                                                       ple for control volumes
                                                                                                                                  used in this book. It serves
As for the case of the mass rate balance, the energy rate balance can be expressed in terms                                       as the starting point for
of local properties to obtain forms that are more generally applicable. Thus, the term Ecv(t),                                    applying the conservation
representing the total energy associated with the control volume at time t, can be written as                                     of energy principle to con-
a volume integral                                                                                                                 trol volumes in problem
                                                                                                                                  solving.

                                Ecv1t2                         r au  V2  gzb dV
                                              re dV                    2                                                  (4.16)

                                             V              V

Similarly, the terms accounting for the energy transfers accompanying mass flow and flow
work at inlets and exits can be expressed as shown in the following form of the energy rate
balance

                        d                                                 V2
                                       ##

                    dt     re dV  Qcv  Wcv  a c                    ah     2     gzb rVn dA d

                        V                                 i      A                                           i            (4.17)

                                         a c          ah     V2    gzb   r Vn  dA d
                                              e              2
                                                   A                                   e

Addit#ional forms of the energy rate balance can be obtained by expressing the heat transfer

rate  Qcv  as  the  integral  of  the  heat  flux  over   the  boundary   of  the  control  volume,             and  the  work
 #

Wcv in terms of normal and shear stresses at the moving portions of the boundary.

In principle, the change in the energy of a control volume over a time period can be

obtained by integration of the energy rate balance with respect to time. Such integrations re-

quire information about the time dependences of the work and heat transfer rates, the various

mass flow rates, and the states at which mass enters and leaves the control volume. Exam-

ples of this type of analysis are presented in Sec. 4.4. In Sec. 4.3 to follow, we consider forms

that the mass and energy rate balances take for control volumes at steady state, for these are

frequently used in practice.

4.3 Analyzing Control Volumes at
         Steady State

In this section steady-state forms of the mass and energy rate balances are developed and
applied to a variety of cases of engineering interest. The steady-state forms obtained do not
apply to the transient startup or shutdown periods of operation of such devices, but only to
periods of steady operation. This situation is commonly encountered in engineering.
132 Chapter 4 Control Volume Analysis Using Energy

   4.3.1 Steady-State Forms of the Mass and
                  Energy Rate Balances

  For a control volume at steady state, the conditions of the mass within the control volume and
  at the boundary do not vary with time. The mass flow rates and the rates of energy transfer
  by heat and work are also constant with time. There can be no accumulation of mass within
  the control volume, so dmcvdt  0 and the mass rate balance, Eq. 4.2, takes the form

                                                                  #                           #                                                      (4.18)
                                                             a mi                        a me

                                                                  i                       e

                                                        1mass rate in2 1mass rate out2

  Furthermore, at steady state dEcvdt  0, so Eq. 4.15 can be written as

           0          #       #                         a     #   a  hi     Vi2       gzib     a      #  a  he    Ve2                  gzeb          (4.19a)
                     Qcv     Wcv                             mi             2                        me           2
                                                          i                                      e

  Alternatively

                  #        a     #  a               hi       Vi2         gzib        #      a     #  a  he      Ve2    gzeb                          (4.19b)
                 Qcv            mi                           2                      Wcv          me             2
                             i                                                               e

                           1energy rate in2                                                 1energy rate out2

  Equation 4.18 asserts that at steady state the total rate at which mass enters the control vol-

  ume equals the total rate at which mass exits. Similarly, Eqs. 4.19 assert that the total rate

  at which energy is transferred into the control volume equals the total rate at which energy

  is transferred out.

  Many important applications involve one-inlet, one-exit control volumes at steady state.

  It is instructive to apply the mass and energy rate balances to this special case. The mass rate
                                                     #        #
  balance  reduces      simply  to                  m1       m2.     That   is,  the     mass  flow     rate    must   be              the   same    at  the
                                                                                                                                                  #
  exit, 2, as it is at the inlet, 1. The common mass flow rate is designated simply by m. Next,

  applying the energy rate balance and factoring the mass flow rate gives

                     0      #                        #        #   c  1h1       h22    1V12       V222       g1z1       z22 d                         (4.20a)
                           Qcv                      Wcv      m                              2

  Or, dividing by the mass flow rate

                             #                          #                             1V21      V222
                                                                                            2
                        0    Qcv                        Wcv          1h1    h22                             g1z1     z22                             (4.20b)
                               #                          #
                             m                           m

  The enthalpy, kinetic energy, and potential energy terms all appear in Eqs. 4.20 as diff-

  erences between their values at the inlet and exit. This illustrates that the datums used to

  assign values to   specific   enthalpy, velocity, and                             eQl# ecvvamt#ioanndcaWn# ccvelm,#parroevridateeds  the same ones are
  used at the inlet  and exit.  In Eq. 4.20b, the ratios                                                                               of energy transfer

  per unit mass flowing through the control volume.

  The foregoing steady-state forms of the energy rate balance relate only energy transfer

  quantities evaluated at the boundary of the control volume. No details concerning properties

  within the control volume are required by, or can be determined with, these equations. When

  applying the energy rate balance in any of its forms, it is necessary to use the same units for

  all terms in the equation. For instance, every term in Eq. 4.20b must have a unit such as kJ/kg

  or Btu/lb. Appropriate unit conversions are emphasized in examples to follow.
                                                                                               4.3 Analyzing Control Volumes at Steady State 133

 4.3.2 Modeling Control Volumes at Steady State

In this section, we provide the basis for subsequent applications by considering the modeling
of control volumes at steady state. In particular, several examples are given in Sec. 4.3.3 show-
ing the use of the principles of conservation of mass and energy, together with relationships
among properties for the analysis of control volumes at steady state. The examples are drawn
from applications of general interest to engineers and are chosen to illustrate points common
to all such analyses. Before studying them, it is recommended that you review the methodol-
ogy for problem solving outlined in Sec. 1.7.3. As problems become more complicated, the
use of a systematic problem-solving approach becomes increasingly important.

   When the mass and energy rate balances are applied to a control volume, simplifications
are normally needed to make the analysis manageable. That is, the control volume of inter-
est is modeled by making assumptions. The careful and conscious step of listing assump-
tions is necessary in every engineering analysis. Therefore, an important part of this section
is devoted to considering various assumptions that are commonly made when applying the
conservation principles to different types of devices. As you study the examples presented in
Sec. 4.3.3, it is important to recognize the role played by careful assumption making in ar-
riving at solutions. In each case considered, steady-state operation is assumed. The flow is
regarded as one-dimensional at places where mass enters and exits the control volume. Also,
at each of these locations equilibrium property relations are as#sumed to apply.

   In several of the examples to follow, the heat transfer term Qcv is set to zero in the energy
rate balance because it is small relative to other energy transfers across the boundary. This
may be the result of one or more of the following factors:

 The outer surface of the control volume is well insulated.

 The outer surface area is too small for there to be effective heat transfer.

 The temperature difference between the control volume and its surroundings is so small
   that the heat transfer can be ignored.

 The gas or liquid passes through the control volume so quickly that there is not enough
   time for significant heat transfer to occur.
                    #

The work term Wcv drops out of the energy rate balance when there are no rotating shafts, dis-
placements of the boundary, electrical effects, or other work mechanisms associated with the
control volume being considered. The kinetic and potential energies of the matter entering and
exiting the control volume are neglected when they are small relative to other energy transfers.

   In practice, the properties of control volumes considered to be at steady state do vary with
time. The steady-state assumption would still apply, however, when properties fluctuate only
slightly about their averages, as for pressure in Fig. 4.5a. Steady state also might be assumed
in cases where periodic time variations are observed, as in Fig. 4.5b. For example, in

p             p

        pave                                                                         pave

        t                                                                         t

   (a)           (b)

 Figure 4.5 Pressure variations about an average. (a) Fluctuation. (b) Periodic.
134 Chapter 4 Control Volume Analysis Using Energy

Thermodynamics in the News...                                                                          STEAPUTLUNERUSIMBUOSFA

Smaller Can Be Better                                         power plant the size of  UNITED                      MERICA
                                                                                                    LARQU
                                                              a shirt button. Another

Engineers are developing miniature systems for use where involves micromotors

weight, portability, and/or compactness are critically impor- with shafts the diame-

tant. Some of these applications involve tiny micro systems ter of a human hair.                       ARTER DOL
with dimensions in the micrometer to millimeter range. Other Emergency workers

somewhat larger meso-scale systems can measure up to a few wearing fire-, chemi-

centimeters.                                                  cal-, or biological-protection suits might in the future be kept

Microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) combining elec- cool by tiny heat pumps imbedded in the suit material.

trical and mechanical features are now widely used for sens-  Engineers report that size reductions cannot go on in-

ing and control. Medical applications of MEMS include minute definitely. As designers aim at smaller sizes, frictional

pressure sensors that monitor pressure within the balloon in- effects and uncontrolled heat transfers pose significant chal-

serted into a blood vessel during angioplasty. Air bags are trig- lenges. Fabrication of miniature systems is also demanding.

gered in an automobile crash by tiny acceleration sensors. Taking a design from the concept stage to high-volume

MEMS are also found in computer hard drives and printers. production can be both expensive and risky, industry rep-

Miniature versions of other technologies are being investi- resentatives say.

gated. One study aims at developing an entire gas turbine

nozzle        reciprocating engines and compressors, the entering and exiting flows pulsate as valves open
diffuser      and close. Other parameters also might be time varying. However, the steady-state assumption
              can apply to control volumes enclosing these devices if the following are satisfied for each suc-
              cessive period of operation: (1) There is no net change in the total energy and the total mass
              within the control volume. (2) The time-averaged mass flow rates, heat transfer rates, work
              rates, and properties of the substances crossing the control surface all remain constant.

               4.3.3 Illustrations

              In this section, we present brief discussions and examples illustrating the analysis of several
              devices of interest in engineering, including nozzles and diffusers, turbines, compressors and
              pumps, heat exchangers, and throttling devices. The discussions highlight some common ap-
              plications of each device and the important modeling assumptions used in thermodynamic
              analysis. The section also considers system integration, in which devices are combined to
              form an overall system serving a particular purpose.

              NOZZLES AND DIFFUSERS

              A nozzle is a flow passage of varying cross-sectional area in which the velocity of a gas
              or liquid increases in the direction of flow. In a diffuser, the gas or liquid decelerates in
              the direction of flow. Figure 4.6 shows a nozzle in which the cross-sectional area decreases

                    V2 > V1              V2 < V1
              1 p2 < p1                   p2 > p1 2

                                 2  1

                       Nozzle                       Diffuser   Figure 4.6 Illustration of a nozzle and a
                                                              diffuser.
               Flow-straightening                                                    4.3 Analyzing Control Volumes at Steady State 135
                      screens
                                                                            Figure 4.7 Wind-tunnel test
               Acceleration                      Deceleration              facility.
                                                        Diffuser
                                  Test
                      Nozzle     section

in the direction of flow and a diffuser in which the walls of the flow passage diverge.
In Fig. 4.7, a nozzle and diffuser are combined in a wind-tunnel test facility. Nozzles and
diffusers for high-speed gas flows formed from a converging section followed by diverg-
ing section are studied in Sec. 9.13.

   For nozzles and diffusers, the only w# ork is flow work at locations where mass enters and
exits the control volume, so the term Wcv drops out of the energy rate equation for these de-
vices. The change in potential energy from inlet to exit is negligible under most conditions.
At steady state the mass and energy rate balances reduce, respectively, to

                     0

               dmcv        #      #
                 dt       m1     m2

                   0       #      #0          #  ah1    V12       gz1b       #  ah2    V22    gz2b
                          Qcv    Wcv         m1         2                   m2         2
           dEcv

            dt

where 1 denotes the inlet and 2 the exit. By combining these into a single expression and

dropping the potential energy change from inlet to exit

                                          #                       a V21     V22 b

                                 0    Qcv        1h1    h22                                            (4.21)
                                       #                                 2
                                      m

where   #  is  the    mass    flow  rate.    The  term   #        m#  representing     heat  transfer  with  the
       m                                                Qcv

surroundings per unit of mass flowing through the nozzle or diffuser is often small enough

relative to the enthalpy and kinetic energy changes that it can be dropped, as in the next

example.

E X A M P L E 4 . 3 Calculating Exit Area of a Steam Nozzle

Steam enters a converging­diverging nozzle operating at steady state with p1  40 bar, T1  400C, and a velocity of 10 m/s.
The steam flows through the nozzle with negligible heat transfer and no significant change in potential energy. At the exit,
p2  15 bar, and the velocity is 665 m/s. The mass flow rate is 2 kg/s. Determine the exit area of the nozzle, in m2.

SOLUTION

Known: Steam flows at steady state through a nozzle with known properties at the inlet and exit, a known mass flow rate,
and negligible effects of heat transfer and potential energy.
Find: Determine the exit area.
136 Chapter 4 Control Volume Analysis Using Energy
   Schematic and Given Data:

                                                                            T                         T1 = 400 °C 1

                     m = 2 kg/s         Insulation         p2 = 15 bar                            p = 40 bar                         2
                                                           V2 = 665 m/s                             p = 15 bar                       v
                                 Control volume     2
                                 boundary                                                                                                     Figure E4.3
        p1 = 40 bar
        T1 = 400 °C
        V1 = 10 m/s

                       1

  Assumptions:

  1. The control volume shown on the accompanying figure is at steady state.
                                             #

  2. Heat transfer is negligible and Wcv  0.
  3. The change in potential energy from inlet to exit can be neglected.

                                                                                         #
  Analysis: The exit area can be determined from the mass flow rate m and Eq. 4.4b, which can be arranged to read

                                                                               #
                                                                          mv2
                                                                 A2       V2

  To evaluate A2 from this equation requires the specific volume v2 at the exit, and this requires that the exit state be fixed.
      The state at the exit is fixed by the values of two independent intensive properties. One is the pressure p2, which is known.

  The other is the specific enthalpy h2, determined from the steady-state energy rate balance

                                       #0 #0               #         V21             gz1b          #        V22       gz2b
                                 0  Qcv  Wcv              m ah1      2                            m a h2    2

  #               #

  where Qcv and W#cv are deleted by assumption 2. The change in specific potential energy drops out in accordance with as-
  sumption 3 and m cancels, leaving

                                                    0     1h1        h22          a V12        V22 b
                                                                                         2

  Solving for h2

                                                          h2     h1       a V12          V22 b
                                                                                     2

  From Table A-4, h1  3213.6 kJ/kg. The velocities V1 and V2 are given. Inserting values and converting the units of the kinetic
  energy terms to kJ/kg results in

                                 h2  3213.6 kJ/kg      c  11022      166522       d  a  m2  b  `       1N       `  `     1 kJ     `
                                                                  2                     s2           kg # m/s2        103 N #
                                                                                                  1                            m

                                  3213.6  221.1  2992.5 kJ/kg
                                                                         4.3 Analyzing Control Volumes at Steady State 137

  Finally, referring to Table A-4 at p2  15 bar with h2  2992.5 kJ/kg, the specific volume at the exit is v2  0.1627 m3/kg.
  The exit area is then

                                      A2    12  kg/s2 10.1627 m3/ kg2    4.89    104 m2
                                                     665 m/s

   Although equilibrium property relations apply at the inlet and exit of the control volume, the intervening states of the steam

      are not necessarily equilibrium states. Accordingly, the expansion through the nozzle is represented on the T­v diagram

      as a dashed line.

   Care must be taken in converting the units for specific kinetic energy to kJ/kg.
   The area at the nozzle inlet can be found similarly, using A1  m# v1V1.

  Stationary blades  Rotating blades                    Figure 4.8 Schematic of an axial-
                                                       flow turbine.

TURBINES

A turbine is a device in which work is developed as a result of a gas or liquid passing through      turbine
a set of blades attached to a shaft free to rotate. A schematic of an axial-flow steam or gas
turbine is shown in Fig. 4.8. Turbines are widely used in vapor power plants, gas turbine
power plants, and aircraft engines (Chaps. 8 and 9). In these applications, superheated steam
or a gas enters the turbine and expands to a lower exit pressure as work is developed. A hy-
draulic turbine installed in a dam is shown in Fig. 4.9. In this application, water falling through
the propeller causes the shaft to rotate and work is developed.

Water level

Water flow

                                          Water level

                     Propeller

                                                        Figure 4.9 Hydraulic turbine
                                                       installed in a dam.
138 Chapter 4 Control Volume Analysis Using Energy

                                    For a turbine at steady state the mass and energy rate balances reduce to give Eq. 4.20b.
                                When gases are under consideration, the potential energy change is typically negligible. With
                                a proper selection of the boundary of the control volume enclosing the turbine, the kinetic
                                energy change is usually small enough to be neglected. The only heat transfer between the
                                turbine and surroundings would be unavoidable heat transfer, and as illustrated in the next
                                example this is often small relative to the work and enthalpy terms.

E X A M P L E 4 . 4 Calculating Heat Transfer from a Steam Turbine

Steam enters a turbine operating at steady state with a mass flow rate of 4600 kg/h. The turbine develops a power output of
1000 kW. At the inlet, the pressure is 60 bar, the temperature is 400C, and the velocity is 10 m /s. At the exit, the pressure
is 0.1 bar, the quality is 0.9 (90%), and the velocity is 50 m /s. Calculate the rate of heat transfer between the turbine and sur-
roundings, in kW.

SOLUTION

Known: A steam turbine operates at steady state. The mass flow rate, power output, and states of the steam at the inlet and
exit are known.
Find: Calculate the rate of heat transfer.
Schematic and Given Data:

                                                                                1

                                                        T                            T1 = 400°C

m· 1 = 4600 kg/h                                                  p = 60 bar

p1 = 60 bar                     W· cv = 1000 kW                        p = 0.1 bar
T1 = 400°C                                                                                2
                           2
V1 = 10 m/s 1     p2 = 0.1 bar
                  x2 = 0.9 (90%)
                  V2 = 50 m/s                                                                       v
                                                                                                             Figure E4.4

Assumptions:

1. The control volume shown on the accompanying figure is at steady state.
2. The change in potential energy from inlet to exit can be neglected.

Analysis: To calculate the heat transfer rate, begin with the one-inlet, one-exit form of the energy rate balance for a control
volume at steady state

                  0     #      #         #       a  h1     V21    gz1b      #   ah2          V22    gz2b
                       Qcv    Wcv       m                  2               m                 2

#                                #

where m is the mass flow rate. Solving for Qcv and dropping the potential energy change from inlet to exit

                             #         #             #  c  1h2    h12    a V22     V12 b d
                            Qcv       Wcv           m                           2

To compare the magnitudes of the enthalpy and kinetic energy terms, and stress the unit conversions needed, each of these
terms is evaluated separately.
                                                                                                 4.3 Analyzing Control Volumes at Steady State 139

      First, the specific enthalpy difference h2  h1 is found. Using Table A-4, h1  3177.2 kJ/kg. State 2 is a two-phase
  liquid­vapor mixture, so with data from Table A-3 and the given quality

                                                  h2  hf 2  x21hg2  hf 22
                                                       191.83  10.92 12392.82  2345.4 kJ/kg

  Hence

                                                  h2  h1  2345.4  3177.2  831.8 kJ/kg

  Consider next the specific kinetic energy difference. Using the given values for the velocities

                                         a V22  V21 b         15022     11022    d  a  m2  b  `       1N         `     `     1 kJ     `
                                               2             c                         s2           kg # m/s2             103 N #
                                                                                                 1                                 m
                                                                     2

                                                        1.2 kJ/kg

                  #
  Calculating Qcv from the above expression

                                     #     11000  kW2                kg                          1.22 a kJ b        `    1h  s  `  `  1 kW    `
                                    Qcv                      a4600 b 1831.8                             kg             3600           1 kJ/s

                                                                     h

                                          61.3 kW

   The magnitude of the change in specific kinetic energy from inlet to exit is much smaller than the specific enthalpy

        change.

        The  negative  va# lue  of   #   means  that  there  is  heat  transfer  from      the      turbine  to     its   surroundings,          as  would  be  expected.  The
                                    Qcv

        magnitude of Qcv is small relative to the power developed.

COMPRESSORS AND PUMPS

Compressors are devices in which work is done on a gas passing through them in order to                                                              compressor
raise the pressure. In pumps, the work input is used to change the state of a liquid passing                                                         pump
through. A reciprocating compressor is shown in Fig. 4.10. Figure 4.11 gives schematic di-
agrams of three different rotating compressors: an axial-flow compressor, a centrifugal com-
pressor, and a Roots type.

   The mass and energy rate balances reduce for compressors and pumps at steady state, as
for the case of turbines considered previously. For compressors, the changes in specific kinetic
and potential energies from inlet to exit are often small relative to the work done per unit of
mass passing through the device. Heat transfer with the surroundings is frequently a secondary
effect in both compressors and pumps.

   The next two examples illustrate, respectively, the analysis of an air compressor and a
power washer. In each case the objective is to determine the power required to operate the
device.

Inlet

Outlet                                                            Figure 4.10 Reciprocating compressor.
140 Chapter 4 Control Volume Analysis Using Energy                                                          Outlet
                                                                     Rotor
                                                                         Stator                 Impeller

                                                              (a)                                                          Inlet   Impeller
                                                                                                                                  Driveshaft

                                                                                                                      (b)
                                                                                                Outlet

                                                                       Inlet
                                                                        (c)
 Figure 4.11 Rotating compressors. (a) Axial flow. (b) Centrifugal. (c) Roots type.

E X A M P L E 4 . 5 Calculating Compressor Power

Air enters a compressor operating at steady state at a pressure of 1 bar, a temperature of 290 K, and a velocity of 6 m/s through
an inlet with an area of 0.1 m2. At the exit, the pressure is 7 bar, the temperature is 450 K, and the velocity is 2 m/s. Heat
transfer from the compressor to its surroundings occurs at a rate of 180 kJ/min. Employing the ideal gas model, calculate the
power input to the compressor, in kW.

SOLUTION
Known: An air compressor operates at steady state with known inlet and exit states and a known heat transfer rate.
Find: Calculate the power required by the compressor.
Schematic and Given Data:

     Assumptions:                                                                                ·
                                                                                                Wcv = ?
     1. The control volume shown on the accompanying
     figure is at steady state.                                                  p1 = 1 bar  1      Air     2 p2 = 7 bar
     2. The change in potential energy from inlet to exit                        T1 = 290 K     compressor     T2 = 450 K
     can be neglected.                                                                                         V2 = 2 m/s
                                                                                 V1 = 6 m/s
 3. The ideal gas model applies for the air.                                     A1 = 0.1m2

                                                                                                 ·                                 Figure E4.5
                                                                                                Qcv = ­180 kJ/min
                                                                                           4.3 Analyzing Control Volumes at Steady State 141

  Analysis: To calculate the power input to the compressor, begin with the energy rate balance for the one-inlet, one-exit con-
  trol volume at steady state:

                              0     #      #        #  a  h1        V12         gz1b           #  a  h2      V22         gz2b
                                   Qcv    Wcv      m                2                         m              2

  Solving

                                         #       #         #  c  1h1            h22        a V21      V22 b  d
                                        Wcv     Qcv       m                                       2

  The change in potential energy from inlet to exit drops out by assumption 2.
                               #

      The mass flow rate m can be evaluated with given data at the inlet and the ideal gas equation of state.

                           #     A1V1     A1V1p1              10.1 m22 16 m/s2 1105 N/m22                          0.72  kg/s
                          m       v1
                                          1RM2T1                    8314        N    #  m
                                                                 a  28.97       kg   #  K  b  1290    K2

  The specific enthalpies h1 and h2 can be fou#nd from Table A-22. At 290 K, h1  290.16 kJ/kg. At 450 K, h2  451.8 kJ/kg.
  Substituting values into the expression for Wcv

                               #     a180 kJ b         `  1 min     `   0.72 kg c 1290.16  451.82 kJ
                              Wcv             min          60 s                         s                                kg

                                          1622     1222       a  m2    b  `  1    1N          `   `     1 kJ    m  `  d
                                     a                 b         s2             kg # m/s2            103 N #

                                                2

                                     3    kJ         kg       1161.64                   0.022     kJ
                                                0.72
                                          s               s                                       kg

                                    119.4 kJ ` 1 kW `  119.4 kW
                                                s 1 kJ/s

   The applicability of the ideal gas model can be checked by reference to the generalized compressibility chart.

   The contribution of the kinetic energy is negligible in this case. Also, the heat transfer rate is seen to be small relative to

  the power input.

                    #  #
   In this example Qcv and Wcv have negative values, indicating that the direction of the heat transfer is from the compressor

  and work is done on the air passing through the compressor. The magnitude of the power input to the compressor is

  119.4 kW.

  E X A M P L E 4 . 6 Power Washer

  A power washer is being used to clean the siding of a house. Water enters at 20C, 1 atm, with a volumetric flow rate of
  0.1 liter/s through a 2.5-cm-diameter hose. A jet of water exits at 23C, 1 atm, with a velocity of 50 m/s at an elevation
  of 5 m. At steady state, the magnitude of the heat transfer rate from the power unit to the surroundings is 10% of the
  power input. The water can be considered incompressible, and g  9.81 m/s2. Determine the power input to the motor,
  in kW.

  SOLUTION

  Known: A power washer operates at steady state with known inlet and exit conditions. The heat transfer rate is known as a
  percentage of the power input.

  Find: Determine the power input.
142 Chapter 4 Control Volume Analysis Using Energy
   Schematic and Given Data:

                                                          p2 = 1 atm
                                                          T2 = 23°C
                                                          V2 = 50 m/s
                                                          z2 = 5 m

                                                             2                                           Assumptions:
                                                                          5m
                                                                                                         1. A control volume enclosing the power unit
                                                                                                         and the delivery hose is at steady state.
                                                                                                         2. The water is modeled as incompressible.

p1 = 1 atm
T1 = 20°C
(AV)1 = 0.1 liter/s
D1 = 2.5 cm

1          Hose

     +                                                                                                    Figure E4.6
       ­

Analysis: To calculate the power input, begin with the one-inlet, one-exit form of the energy balance for a control volume
at steady state

                                    0      #          #       #    c  1h1       h22     a V21     V22 b     g1z1     z22  d
                                          Qcv        Wcv     m                                 2

           #               #                         #
 Introducing Qcv  10.12Wcv, and solving for Wcv

                                           #          #   c  1h1      h22         1V21     V222      g 1z1    z22 d
                                          Wcv        m                                  2
                                                     0.9

The  mass     flow   rate   #  can  be  evaluated    using   the      given     volumetric     flow  rate   and   v    vf (20C)    1.0018    103  m3/kg
                           m

from Table A-2, as follows

                                              #    1AV21v
                                             m

                                                  10.1 L /s2 11.0018  103 m3/kg2 ` 103 m3 `

                                                                                                 1L

                                                  0.1 kg/s

 Dividing the given volumetric flow rate by the inlet area, the inlet velocity is V1  0.2 m /s.

         The specific enthalpy term is evaluated using Eq. 3.20b, with p1  p2  1 atm and c  4.18 kJ/kg # K from Table A-19

                                                  h1  h2  c 1T1  T22  v1p1  p220

                                                              14.18 kJ/kg # K2 13 K2  12.54 kJ/kg

Evaluating the specific kinetic energy term

                                          3  10.222       15022 4  a  m      2

                           V12  V22                                   s    b         1N               1 kJ
                               2                                                                  ` 103 N # m `
                                                          2                     ` 1 kg # m /s2 `                  1.25 kJ/kg
                                                                        4.3 Analyzing Control Volumes at Steady State 143

Finally, the specific potential energy term is

                           g1z1  z22   19.81 m /s22 10  52m  `  1    1N        `  `     1 kJ  m  `   0.05 kJ/kg
                                                                   kg # m /s2        103 N #

         Inserting values   #     10.1 kg/s2  3 112.542         11.252            10.052 4    a kJ b  `  1 kW    `
                           Wcv       0.9                                                       kg        1 kJ/s


Thus

                                                 #
                                                Wcv  1.54 kW

where the minus sign indicates that power is provided to the washer.

                                                               #

 Since power is required to operate the washer, Wcv is negative in# accord with our sign convention. The energ#y transfer by

    heat is# from the c#ontrol volume to the surroundings, and thus Qcv is negative as well. Using the value of Wcv found be-
    low, Qcv  10.12Wcv  0.154 kW.

 The power washer develops a high-velocity jet of water at the exit. The inlet velocity is small by comparison.

 The power input to the washer is accounted for by heat transfer from the washer to the surroundings and the increases in

    specific enthalpy, kinetic energy, and potential energy of the water as it is pumped through the power washer.

HEAT EXCHANGERS

Devices that transfer energy between fluids at different temperatures by heat transfer modes                        heat exchanger
such as discussed in Sec. 2.4.2 are called heat exchangers. One common type of heat ex-
changer is a vessel in which hot and cold streams are mixed directly as shown in Fig. 4.12a.
An open feedwater heater is an example of this type of device. Another common type of heat

      (a)                                       (b)

      (c)                                       (d)

 Figure 4.12 Common heat exchanger types. (a) Direct contact heat
exchanger. (b) Tube-within-a-tube counterflow heat exchanger. (c) Tube-within-
a-tube parallel flow heat exchanger. (d ) Cross-flow heat exchanger.
144 Chapter 4 Control Volume Analysis Using Energy

                                exchanger is one in which a gas or liquid is separated from another gas or liquid by a wall
                                through which energy is conducted. These heat exchangers, known as recuperators, take many
                                different forms. Counterflow and parallel tube-within-a-tube configurations are shown in
                                Figs. 4.12b and 4.12c, respectively. Other configurations include cross-flow, as in automobile
                                radiators, and multiple-pass shell-and-tube condensers and evaporators. Figure 4.12d illus-
                                trates a cross-flow heat exchanger.

                                    The only work interaction at the boundary of a control volume enclos# ing a heat exchanger
                                is flow work at the places where matter enters and exits, so the term Wcv of the energy rate
                                balance can be set to zero. Although high rates of energy transfer may be achieved from
                                stream to stream, the heat transfer from the outer surface of the heat exchanger to the sur-
                                roundings is often small enough to be neglected. In addition, the kinetic and potential ener-
                                gies of the flowing streams can often be ignored at the inlets and exits.

                                    The next example illustrates how the mass and energy rate balances are applied to a con-
                                denser at steady state. Condensers are commonly found in power plants and refrigeration
                                systems.

E X A M P L E 4 . 7 Power Plant Condenser

Steam enters the condenser of a vapor power plant at 0.1 bar with a quality of 0.95 and condensate exits at 0.1 bar and 45C.
Cooling water enters the condenser in a separate stream as a liquid at 20C and exits as a liquid at 35C with no change in
pressure. Heat transfer from the outside of the condenser and changes in the kinetic and potential energies of the flowing
streams can be ignored. For steady-state operation, determine

(a) the ratio of the mass flow rate of the cooling water to the mass flow rate of the condensing stream.
(b) the rate of energy transfer from the condensing steam to the cooling water, in kJ per kg of steam passing through the
condenser.

SOLUTION

Known: Steam is condensed at steady state by interacting with a separate liquid water stream.

Find: Determine the ratio of the mass flow rate of the cooling water to the mass flow rate of the steam and the rate of energy
transfer from the steam to the cooling water.

Schematic and Given Data:

Condensate            Steam
                 1 0.1 bar
  0.1 bar 2
   45°C              x = 0.95

                                  T

Cooling          Cooling

water 3          4 water

20°C Control volume for part (a) 35°C                                  0.1 bar
                                                                  1
              2  1                                        45.8°C
Condensate        Steam                        2                            v

                                                   4

                                                3

                           Energy transfer to
                           cooling water

         Control volume for part (b)

                                                                                 Figure E4.7
                                                                                     4.3 Analyzing Control Volumes at Steady State 145

  Assumptions:

  1. Each of the two control volumes shown on the accompanying sketch is at steady-state.
                                                                                                                          #

  2. There is no significant heat transfer between the overall condenser and its surroundings, and Wcv  0.

  3. Changes in the kinetic and potential energies of the flowing streams from inlet to exit can be ignored.

  4. At states 2, 3, and 4, h  hf (T ) (see Eq. 3.14).

  Analysis: The steam and the cooling water streams do not mix. Thus, the mass rate balances for each of the two streams re-

  duce at steady state to give

                                                  ##                                 ##
                                                 m1  m2 and m3  m4

  (a) The ratio of the mass flow rate of the cooling water to the mass flow rate of the condensing steam, m# 3m# 1, can be found

  from the steady-state form of the energy rate balance applied to the overall condenser as follows:

                                0     #      #        #   ah1         V12      gz1b     #  a  h3    V23    gz3b
                                     Qcv    Wcv      m1               2                m3           2

                                        #  ah2       V22        gz2b        #  ah4    V24     gz4b
                                       m2            2                     m4         2

  The underlined terms drop out by assumptions 2 and 3. With these simplifications, together with the above mass flow rate

  relations, the energy rate balance becomes simply

                                                 0  m11h1  h22  m31h3  h42#    #

  Solving, we get

                                                                 #           
                                                                m3       h1    h2
                                                                 #       h4    h3
                                                                m1

  The specific enthalpy h1 can be determined using the given quality and data from Table A-3. From Table A-3 at 0.1 bar, hf 
  191.83 kJ/kg and hg  2584.7 kJ/kg, so

                                   h1  191.83  0.9512584.7  191.832  2465.1 kJ/kg

 Using assumption 4, the specific enthalpy at 2 is given by h2  hf(T2)  188.45 kJ/kg. Similarly, h3  hf (T3) and h4  hf(T4),
  giving h4  h3  62.7 kJ/kg. Thus

                                                  #                   
                                                 m3
                                                  #          2465.1        188.45       36.3

                                                 m1                   62.7

  (b) For a control volume enclosing the steam side of the condenser only, the steady-state form of energy rate balance is

                                0     #      #        #   a  h1       V21      gz1b     #  ah2      V22    gz2b
                                     Qcv    Wcv      m1               2                m2           2

                                                                                                             ##
  The underlined terms drop out by assumptions 2 and 3. Combining this equation with m1  m2, the following expression for

  the rate of energy transfer between the condensing steam and the cooling water results:

                                                             #        #

                                                             Qcv  m11h2  h12

                                                           #
  Dividing by the mass flow rate of the steam, m1, and inserting values

                                          #

                                     Qcv    h2       h1      188.45          2465.1     2276.7      kJ/kg
                                      #
                                     m1

  where the minus sign signifies that energy is transferred from the condensing steam to the cooling water.

   Alternatively, (h4  h3) can be evaluated using the incompressible liquid model via Eq. 3.20b.

   Depending on where the boundary of the control volume is located, two different formulations of the energy rate balance

      are obtained. In part (a), both streams are included in the control# volume. Energy transfer between them occurs internally
      and not across the boundary of the cont#rol volume, so the term Qcv drops out of the energy rate balance. With the control
      volume of part (b), however, the term Qcv must be included.
146 Chapter 4 Control Volume Analysis Using Energy

                                    Excessive temperatures in electronic components are avoided by providing appropriate
                                cooling, as illustrated in the next example.

E X A M P L E 4 . 8 Cooling Computer Components

The electronic components of a computer are cooled by air flowing through a fan mounted at the inlet of the electronics en-
closure. At steady state, air enters at 20C, 1 atm. For noise control, the velocity of the entering air cannot exceed 1.3 m/s.
For temperature control, the temperature of the air at the exit cannot exceed 32C. The electronic components and fan receive,
respectively, 80 W and 18 W of electric power. Determine the smallest fan inlet diameter, in cm, for which the limits on the
entering air velocity and exit air temperature are met.

SOLUTION

Known: The electronic components of a computer are cooled by air flowing through a fan mounted at the inlet of the elec-
tronics enclosure. Conditions are specified for the air at the inlet and exit. The power required by the electronics and the fan
are also specified.

Find: Determine for these conditions the smallest fan inlet diameter.

Schematic and Given Data:

                                                                      +
                                                                        ­

   Electronic                     T2  32°C Air out
   components                                 2

   Fan

1  Air in

T1 = 20°C
p1 = 1 atm
V1  1.3 m/s

                                                                                 Figure E4.8

Assumptions:

1. The control volume shown on the accompanying figure is at steady state.

                                                                                                                                      #
2. Heat transfer from the outer surface of the electronics enclosure to the surroundings is negligible. Thus, Qcv  0.

 3. Changes in kinetic and potential energies can be ignored.

 4. Air is modeled as an ideal gas with cp  1.005 kJ/kg # K.

                                                                                           #
Analysis: The inlet area A1 can be determined from the mass flow rate m and Eq. 4.4b, which can be rearranged to read

                                                                 #
                                                                 mv1
                                              A1                 V1

The mass flow rate can be evaluated, in turn, from the steady-state energy rate balance

               0     #      #      #  c  1h1     h22                   a  V  2     V  2  b    g1z1    z22  d
                    Qcv    Wcv    m                                          1  2     2

The underlined terms drop out by assumptions 2 and 3, leaving

                                              #                     #

                                  0  Wcv  m1h1  h22
                                                                                          4.3 Analyzing Control Volumes at Steady State 147

       #                                                                                                                                     #

where  Wcv  accounts    for  the  total electric     power     provided    to   the   electronic           components      and  the   fan:   Wcv    (80  W)  
                                        #
(18 W)  98 W. Solving for m, and using assumption 4 with Eq. 3.51 to evaluate (h1  h2)
                                                                                   #

                                                                     #     1Wcv2
                                                                    m
                                                                           cp1T2  T12

       Introducing this into the expression for A1 and using the ideal gas model to evaluate the specific volume v1

                                                                                #

                                                           A1       1   c    1Wcv2        d a RT1 b
                                                                    V1     cp1T2  T12         p1

From this expression we see that A1 increases when V1 and/or T2 decrease. Accordingly, since V1  1.3 m/s and T2  305 K
(32C), the inlet area must satisfy

                             1                       98 W                          1 kJ      ` 1 J/s             a  8314   N#  m   b  293 K
                                                                                   103 J      1W                    28.97  kg  #K     N/m2
                    A1                                                          `         `             `  Ą  ±                              
                          1.3 m/s                    kJ                                                             1.01325  105
                                        a1.005     kg # K  b  1305      2932 K

                         0.005 m2

Then, since A1  pD124

                                                   D1  B       142 10.005 m22       0.08 m `      102 cm         `

                                                                        p                             1m

                                                   D1  8 cm

For the specified conditions, the smallest fan inlet diameter is 8 cm.

 Cooling air typically enters and exits electronic enclosures at low velocities, and thus kinetic energy effects are insignificant.

 The applicability of the ideal gas model can be checked by reference to the generalized compressibility chart. Since the

    temperature of the air increases by no more than 12C, the specific heat cp is nearly constant (Table A-20).

THROTTLING DEVICES

A significant reduction in pressure can be achieved simply by introducing a restriction into

a line through which a gas or liquid flows. This is commonly done by means of a partially

opened valve or a porous plug, as illustrated in Fig. 4.13.

For a control volume enclosing such a device, the mass and energy rate balances reduce

at steady state to

            0        #        #
                    m1       m2

            0        #        #0         #  a  h1    V21       gz1b         #  ah2           V22        gz2b
                    Qcv      Wcv        m1           2                     m2                2

                                                     Inlet              Porous plug               Exit

Inlet                             Exit

       Partially open valve

 Figure 4.13 Examples of throttling devices.
148 Chapter 4 Control Volume Analysis Using Energy

                        There is usually no significant heat transfer with the surroundings and the change in poten-
                        tial energy from inlet to exit is negligible. With these idealizations, the mass and energy rate
                        balances combine to give

                                                       h1    V12    h2     V22
                                                             2             2

                        Although velocities may be relatively high in the vicinity of the restriction, measurements
                        made upstream and downstream of the reduced flow area show in most cases that the change
                        in the specific kinetic energy of the gas or liquid between these locations can be neglected.
                        With this further simplification, the last equation reduces to

throttling process                                           h1  h2                                                (4.22)

throttling calorimeter  When the flow through a valve or other restriction is idealized in this way, the process is
                        called a throttling process.

                           An application of the throttling process occurs in vapor-compression refrigeration sys-
                        tems, where a valve is used to reduce the pressure of the refrigerant from the pressure at the
                        exit of the condenser to the lower pressure existing in the evaporator. We consider this fur-
                        ther in Chap. 10. The throttling process also plays a role in the Joule­Thomson expansion
                        considered in Chap. 11. Another application of the throttling process involves the throttling
                        calorimeter, which is a device for determining the quality of a two-phase liquid­vapor mix-
                        ture. The throttling calorimeter is considered in the next example.

E X A M P L E 4 . 9 Measuring Steam Quality

A supply line carries a two-phase liquid­vapor mixture of steam at 20 bars. A small fraction of the flow in the line is diverted
through a throttling calorimeter and exhausted to the atmosphere at 1 bar. The temperature of the exhaust steam is measured
as 120C. Determine the quality of the steam in the supply line.

SOLUTION
Known: Steam is diverted from a supply line through a throttling calorimeter and exhausted to the atmosphere.
Find: Determine the quality of the steam in the supply line.
Schematic and Given Data:

                    Steam line, 20 bars   p

                        Thermometer

1                                                   1        p1 = 20 bars

                        Calorimeter

                                                                          p2 = 1 bar
                                                                        2 T2 = 120°C

                              p2 = 1 bar                                v
                        2 T2 = 120°C                                                                  Figure E4.9
                                                                4.3 Analyzing Control Volumes at Steady State 149

     Assumptions:

     1. The control volume shown on the accompanying figure is at steady state.
     2. The diverted steam undergoes a throttling process.

     Analysis: For a throttling process, the energy and mass balances reduce to give h2  h1, which agrees with Eq. 4.22.
     Thus, with state 2 fixed, the specific enthalpy in the supply line is known, and state 1 is fixed by the known values of p1
     and h1.

 As shown on the accompanying p­v diagram, state 1 is in the two-phase liquid­vapor region and state 2 is in the super-

     heated vapor region. Thus

                                                h2  h1  hf1  x11hg1  hf12

     Solving for x1

                                                x1    h2  hf1
                                                      hg1  hf1

     From Table A-3 at 20 bars, hf1  908.79 kJ/kg and hg1  2799.5 kJ/kg. At 1 bar and 120C, h2  2766.6 kJ/kg from Table A-4.
     Inserting values into the above expression, the quality in the line is x1  0.956 (95.6%).

      For throttling calorimeters exhausting to the atmosphere, the quality in the line must be greater than about 94% to ensure

         that the steam leaving the calorimeter is superheated.

SYSTEM INTEGRATION

Thus far, we have studied several types of components selected from those commonly seen
in practice. These components are usually encountered in combination, rather than individ-
ually. Engineers often must creatively combine components to achieve some overall objec-
tive, subject to constraints such as minimum total cost. This important engineering activity
is called system integration.

   Many readers are already familiar with a particularly successful system integration: the
simple power plant shown in Fig. 4.14. This system consists of four components in series, a
turbine-generator, condenser, pump, and boiler. We consider such power plants in detail in
subsequent sections of the book. The example to follow provides another illustration. Many
more are considered in later sections and in end-of-chapter problems.

                             Q in

                               Boiler

W p  Pump                         Turbine  W t

                     Condenser                   Figure 4.14 Simple vapor power plant.

                           Q out
150 Chapter 4 Control Volume Analysis Using Energy

Thermodynamics in the News...

Sensibly Built Homes Cost No More                                The walls, roof, and
                                                                 floor of this 1565
Healthy, comfortable homes that cut energy and water bills       square-foot house are
and protect the environment cost no more, builders say. The      factory-built structural
"I have a Dream House," a highly energy efficient and envi-      insulated panels in-
ronmentally responsible house located close to the Atlanta       corporating foam in-
boyhood home of Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., is a prime           sulation. This choice
example.                                                         allowed designers to
                                                                 reduce the size of the
    The house, developed under U.S. Department of Energy         heating and cooling
auspices, can be heated and cooled for less than a dollar a      equipment, thereby
day, and uses 57% less energy for heating and cooling than a     lowering costs. The
conventional house. Still, construction costs are no more than   house also features
for a conventional house.                                        energy-efficient win-
                                                                 dows, tightly sealed ductwork, and a high-efficiency air con-
    Designers used a whole-house integrated system approach      ditioner that further contribute to energy savings.
whereby components are carefully selected to be comple-
mentary in achieving an energy-thrifty, cost-effective outcome.

E X A M P L E 4 . 1 0 Waste Heat Recovery System

An industrial process discharges gaseous combustion products at 478K, 1 bar with a mass flow rate of 69.78 kg/s. As shown
in Fig. E 4.10, a proposed system for utilizing the combustion products combines a heat-recovery steam generator with a tur-
bine. At steady state, combustion products exit the steam generator at 400K, 1 bar and a separate stream of water enters at
.275 MPa, 38.9C with a mass flow rate of 2.079 kg/s. At the exit of the turbine, the pressure is 0.07 bars and the quality is
93%. Heat transfer from the outer surfaces of the steam generator and turbine can be ignored, as can the changes in kinetic
and potential energies of the flowing streams. There is no significant pressure drop for the water flowing through the steam
generator. The combustion products can be modeled as air as an ideal gas.
(a) Determine the power developed by the turbine, in kJ/s.
(b) Determine the turbine inlet temperature, in C.

SOLUTION

Known: Steady-state operating data are provided for a system consisting of a heat-recovery steam generator and a turbine.
Find: Determine the power developed by the turbine and the turbine inlet temperature. Evaluate the annual value of the
power developed.
Schematic and Given Data:

       p1 = 1 bar                                                       Assumptions:
     T1 = 478°K
m1 = 69.78 kg/s 1                                                       1. The control volume shown on the accompany-
                                                                        ing figure is at steady state.
                                Turbine                          Power  2. Heat transfer is negligible, and changes in
                                                                  out   kinetic and potential energy can be ignored.
        2                 4                                             3. There is no pressure drop for water flowing
                                                                        through the steam generator.
T2 = 400°K    Steam                                                     4. The combustion products are modeled as air as
 p2 = 1 bar  generator                                                  an ideal gas.

             3 p3 = .275 MPa        5                                    Figure E4.10
                T3 = 38.9°C
                m3 = 2.08 kg/s  p5 = .07 bars
                                x5 = 93%
                                                                                          4.3 Analyzing Control Volumes at Steady State 151

Analysis:

(a) The power developed by the turbine is determined from a control volume enclosing both the steam generator and the tur-
bine. Since the gas and water streams do not mix, mass rate balances for each of the streams reduce, respectively, to give

                                                         #            #         #          #
                                                        m1           m2,       m3         m5

The steady-state form of the energy rate balance is

                                        ##               #             V  2    gz1b            #          V   2    gz3b
                                  0  Qcv  Wcv           m1 ah1            1                   m3 ah3          3

                                                                          2                               2

                                                         #  a   h2     V  2    gz2b          #  ah5       V  2     gz5b
                                                        m2                2                 m5               5

                                                                       2                                  2

The underlined terms drop out by assumption 2. With these simplifications, together with the above mass flow rate relations,
the energy rate balance becomes

                                                 #              #                      #

                                                 Wcv  m11h1  h22  m31h3  h52

                                                 where   #         69.78     kg/s,   #      2.08   kg/s
                                                        m1                          m3

The specific enthalpies h1 and h2 can be found from Table A-22: At 478 K, h1  480.35 kJ/kg, and at 400 K, h2  400.98 kJ/kg.
At state 3, water is a liquid. Using Eq. 3.14 and saturated liquid data from Table A-2, h3  hf 1T32  162.9 kJ /kg. State 5 is a

two-phase liquid­vapor mixture. With data from Table A-3 and the given quality

                                              h5  161  0.9312571.72  1612  2403 kJ/kg

                                                          #
    Substituting values into the expression for Wcv

                                                   #
                                                  Wcv  169.78 kg/s2 1480.3  400.982 kJ/kg

                                                           12.079 kg/s2 1162.9  24032 kJ/kg

                                                        876.8 kJ/s  876.8 kW

(b) To determine T4, it is necessary to fix the state at 4. This requires two independent property values. With assumption 3,

one of these properties is pressure, p4  0.275 MPa. The other is the specific enthalpy h4, which can be found from an en-
 ergy rate balance for a control volume enclosing just the steam generator. Mass rate balances for each of the two streams give
 #     #        #       #
m1    m2  and  m3      m4.  With  assumption  2  and  these     mass   flow  rate      relations,  the  steady-state  form  of  the  energy  rate  balance

reduces to

                                                 0  m11h1  h22  m31h3  h42#         #

     Solving for h4                                     #
                                                        m1
                                  h4             h3      #      1h1    h22
                                                        m3

                                               162.9 kJ  a69.78b 1480.3  400.982 kJ
                                                        kg 2.079                                          kg

                                               2825 kJ/kg

Interpolating in Table A-4 at p4  .275 MPa with h4, T4  180C.

 Alternatively, to determine h4 a control volume enclosing just the turbine can be considered. This is left as an exercise.
 The decision about implementing this solution to the problem of utilizing the hot combustion products discharged from

    an industrial process would necessarily rest on the outcome of a detailed economic evaluation, including the cost of pur-

    chasing and operating the steam generator, turbine, and auxiliary equipment.
152 Chapter 4 Control Volume Analysis Using Energy

transient  4.4 Transient Analysis

           Many devices undergo periods of transient operation in which the state changes with time.
           Examples include the startup or shutdown of turbines, compressors, and motors. Additional
           examples are provided by vessels being filled or emptied, as considered in Example 4.2 and
           in the discussion of Fig. 1.3. Because property values, work and heat transfer rates, and mass
           flow rates may vary with time during transient operation, the steady-state assumption is not
           appropriate when analyzing such cases. Special care must be exercised when applying the
           mass and energy rate balances, as discussed next.

           MASS BALANCE

           First, we place the control volume mass balance in a form that is suitable for transient analy-
           sis. We begin by integrating the mass rate balance, Eq. 4.2, from time 0 to a final time t.
           That is

                                   t admcvb dt                t         #                t
                                                                       mi
                                 0 dt                            a  a        b   dt       a a m# eb dt

                                                              0i                        0e

           This takes the form

                                                                          t                        t
                                  mcv1t2  mcv102  a a                         #                        #
                                                                             mi  dt  b  a      a      me  dtb

                                                                 i     0                    e     0

           Introducing the following symbols for the underlined terms

                                                                       amount of mass

                                mi                  t   #           d  entering the control           i,
                                                       mi dt           volume through inlet

                                                    0

                                                                       from time 0 to t

                                                                       amount of mass

                                 me                 t   #              exiting the control
                                                       me dt           volume through exit
                                                                    d                                 e,

                                                    0

                                                                       from time 0 to t

           the mass balance becomes

                                                    mcv1t2  mcv102  a mi  a me                                              (4.23)

                                                                             i              e

           In words, Eq. 4.23 states that the change in the amount of mass contained in the control vol-
           ume equals the difference between the total incoming and outgoing amounts of mass.

           ENERGY BALANCE

           Next, we integrate the energy rate balance, Eq. 4.15, ignoring the effects of kinetic and
           potential energy. The result is

                                                                                 t                         t
             Ucv1t2  Ucv102  Qcv  Wcv  a a                                            #                         #
                                                                                     mi hi  dtb      a  a      mehe  dt  b  (4.24a)

                                                                       i         0                    e0

           where Qcv accounts for the net amount of energy transferred by heat into the control volume
           and Wcv accounts for the net amount of energy transferred by work, except for flow work.
                                                                  4.4 Transient Analysis 153

The integrals shown underlined in Eq. 4.24a account for the energy carried in at the inlets
and out at the exits.

   For the special case where the states at the inlets and exits are constant with time, the re-
spective specific enthalpies, hi and he, would be constant, and the underlined terms of Eq. 4.24a
become

  t #              t      #
   mihi                  mi
         dt    hi            dt                          himi

0                  0

  t #                 t   #
   mehe                  me
         dt    he            dt                          heme

0                  0

Equation 4.24a then takes the following special form

Ucv1t2  Ucv102  Qcv  Wcv  a mihi  a mehe                          (4.24b)

                                                      i        e

Whether in the general form, Eq. 4.24a, or the special form, Eq. 4.24b, these equations ac-
count for the change in the amount of energy contained within the control volume as the dif-
ference between the total incoming and outgoing amounts of energy.

   Another special case is when the intensive properties within the control volume are
uniform with position at each instant. Accordingly, the specific volume and the specific
internal energy are uniform throughout and can depend only on time, that is v(t) and u(t).
Thus

   mcv1t2  Vcv1t2v1t2                                             (4.25)

   Ucv1t2  mcv1t2u1t2

When the control volume is comprised of different phases, the state of each phase would be
assumed uniform throughout.

   The following examples provide illustrations of the transient analysis of control vol-
umes using the conservation of mass and energy principles. In each case considered, we
begin with the general forms of the mass and energy balances and reduce them to forms
suited for the case at hand, invoking the idealizations discussed in this section when
warranted.

   The first example considers a vessel that is partially emptied as mass exits through a
valve.

E X A M P L E 4 . 1 1 Withdrawing Steam from a Tank at Constant Pressure

A tank having a volume of 0.85 m3 initially contains water as a two-phase liquid--vapor mixture at 260C and a quality of
0.7. Saturated water vapor at 260C is slowly withdrawn through a pressure-regulating valve at the top of the tank as energy
is transferred by heat to maintain the pressure constant in the tank. This continues until the tank is filled with saturated vapor
at 260C. Determine the amount of heat transfer, in kJ. Neglect all kinetic and potential energy effects.

SOLUTION
Known: A tank initially holding a two-phase liquid­vapor mixture is heated while saturated water vapor is slowly removed.
This continues at constant pressure until the tank is filled only with saturated vapor.
Find: Determine the amount of heat transfer.
154 Chapter 4 Control Volume Analysis Using Energy

  Schematic and Given Data:

                                                                               Pressure
                                                                           regulating valve

                                                                           e                       e

  T

                 1  2, e             260°C                                 Saturated water-
                                                                           vapor removed,
                                                                            while the tank

                                                                               is heated

                                     v      Initial: two-phase                               Final: saturated vapor

                                            liquid-vapor mixture

   Figure E4.11

  Assumptions:

     1. The control volume is defined by the dashed line on the accompanying diagram.
                                        #

     2. For the control volume, Wcv  0 and kinetic and potential energy effects can be neglected.

     3. At the exit the state remains constant.

 4. The initial and final states of the mass within the vessel are equilibrium states.

  Analysis: Since there is a single exit and no inlet, the mass rate balance takes the form

                                                          dmcv          #
                                                           dt        me

  With assumption 2, the energy rate balance reduces to

                                            dUcv                 #      #
                                             dt                 Qcv    mehe

  Combining the mass and energy rate balances results in

                                            dUcv             #       he  dmcv
                                             dt             Qcv           dt

      By assumption 3, the specific enthalpy at the exit is constant. Accordingly, integration of the last equation gives

                                            ˘Ucv  Qcv  he ˘mcv

  Solving for the heat transfer Qcv

                                            Qcv  ˘Ucv  he ˘mcv

  or

                                     Qcv  1m2u2  m1u12  he1m2  m12

  where m1 and m2 denote, respectively, the initial and final amounts of mass within the tank.
      The terms u1 and m1 of the foregoing equation can be evaluated with property values from Table A-2 at 260C and the

  given value for quality. Thus

                                     u1  uf  x11ug  uf2
                                         1128.4  10.7212599.0  1128.42  2157.8 kJ/kg
                                                                                        4.4 Transient Analysis 155

Also,

       v1  vf  x11vg  uf2
           1.2755  103  10.72 10.04221  1.2755  1032  29.93  103 m3/kg

Using the specific volume v1, the mass initially contained in the tank is

             V            0.85 m3
       m1  v1  129.93  103 m3/kg2  28.4 kg

The final state of the mass in the tank is saturated vapor at 260C, so Table A-2 gives

       u2  ug1260°C2  2599.0 kJ/kg, v2  vg1260°C2  42.21  103 m3/kg

The mass contained within the tank at the end of the process is

       m2    V     42.21  0.85 m3                                            20.14  kg
             v2            103 m3/kg

Table A-2 also gives he  hg1260°C2  2796.6 kJ/kg.
    Substituting values into the expression for the heat transfer yields

       Qcv  120.142 12599.02  128.42 12157.82  2796.6120.14  28.42
            14,162 kJ

 In this case, idealizations are made about the state of the vapor exiting and the initial and final states of the mass con-

    tained within the tank.

 This expression for Qcv could be obtained by applying Eq. 4.24b together with Eqs. 4.23 and 4.25

   In the next two examples we consider cases where tanks are filled. In Example 4.12, an
initially evacuated tank is filled with steam as power is developed. In Example 4.13, a com-
pressor is used to store air in a tank.

    E X A M P L E 4 . 1 2 Using Steam for Emergency Power Generation

    Steam at a pressure of 15 bar and a temperature of 320C is contained in a large vessel. Connected to the vessel through a
    valve is a turbine followed by a small initially evacuated tank with a volume of 0.6 m3. When emergency power is required,
    the valve is opened and the tank fills with steam until the pressure is 15 bar. The temperature in the tank is then 400C. The
    filling process takes place adiabatically and kinetic and potential energy effects are negligible. Determine the amount of work
    developed by the turbine, in kJ.

    SOLUTION
    Known: Steam contained in a large vessel at a known state flows from the vessel through a turbine into a small tank of
    known volume until a specified final condition is attained in the tank.
    Find: Determine the work developed by the turbine.
156 Chapter 4 Control Volume Analysis Using Energy

Schematic and Given Data:

             Valve Control volume boundary

Steam at     Turbine        V=
 15 bar,                   0.6 m3
 320°C

                           Initially                   Figure E4.12
                           evacuated
                           tank

     Assumptions:

     1. The control volume is defined by the dashed line on the accompanying diagram.
                                        #

     2. For the control volume, Qcv  0 and kinetic and potential energy effects are negligible.

 3. The state of the steam within the large vessel remains constant. The final state of the steam in the smaller tank is an equi-

     librium state.

     4. The amount of mass stored within the turbine and the interconnecting piping at the end of the filling process is negligible.

     Analysis: Since the control volume has a single inlet and no exits, the mass rate balance reduces to

                                                      dmcv     #
                                                       dt     mi

The energy rate balance reduces with assumption 2 to

                                      dUcv                 #       #
                                       dt               Wcv       mi hi

Combining the mass and energy rate balances gives

                                      dUcv                 #      hi  dmcv
                                       dt               Wcv            dt

Integrating

                                      ˘Ucv  Wcv  hi ˘mcv

 In accordance with assumption 3, the specific enthalpy of the steam entering the control volume is constant at the value cor-

     responding to the state in the large vessel.

         Solving for Wcv

                                      Wcv  hi ˘mcv  ˘Ucv

Ucv and mcv denote, respectively, the changes in internal energy and mass of the control volume. With assumption 4, these
terms can be identified with the small tank only.

    Since the tank is initially evacuated, the terms Ucv and mcv reduce to the internal energy and mass within the tank at
the end of the process. That is

                           ˘Ucv  1m2u22  1m1u120,                 ˘mcv  m2  m1 0

where 1 and 2 denote the initial and final states within the tank, respectively.
    Collecting results yields

                                                   Wcv  m21hi  u22                (1)
                                                                         4.4 Transient Analysis 157

      The mass within the tank at the end of the process can be evaluated from the known volume and the specific volume of
  steam at 15 bar and 400C from Table A-4

                                          V  0.6 m3
        m2  v2  10.203 m3/kg2  2.96 kg

  The specific internal energy of steam at 15 bar and 400C from Table A-4 is 2951.3 kJ/kg. Also, at 15 bar and 320C,
  h1  3081.9 kJ/kg.

      Substituting values into Eq. (1)

        Wcv  2.96 kg13081.9  2951.32kJ/kg  386.6 kJ

   In this case idealizations are made about the state of the steam entering the tank and the final state of the steam in the

      tank. These idealizations make the transient analysis manageable.

   A significant aspect of this example is the energy transfer into the control volume by flow work, incorporated in the pv

      term of the specific enthalpy at the inlet.

   If the turbine were removed and steam allowed to flow adiabatically into the small tank, the final steam temperature in

      the tank would be 477C. This may be verified by setting Wcv to zero in Eq. (1) to obtain u2  hi, which with p2  15 bar
      fixes the final state.

  E X A M P L E 4 . 1 3 Storing Compressed Air in a Tank

  An air compressor rapidly fills a .28m3 tank, initially containing air at 21C, 1 bar, with air drawn from the atmosphere at 21C,
  1 bar. During filling, the relationship between the pressure and specific volume of the air in the tank is pv1.4  constant.
  The ideal gas model applies for the air, and kinetic and potential energy effects are negligible. Plot the pressure, in atm,
  and the temperature, in F, of the air within the tank, each versus the ratio mm1, where m1 is the initial mass in the tank and m is
  the mass in the tank at time t 7 0. Also, plot the compressor work input, in kJ, versus mm1. Let mm1 vary from 1 to 3.

  SOLUTION

  Known: An air compressor rapidly fills a tank having a known volume. The initial state of the air in the tank and the state
  of the entering air are known.
  Find: Plot the pressure and temperature of the air within the tank, and plot the air compressor work input, each versus mm1
  ranging from 1 to 3.
  Schematic and Given Data:

                                                                  Air

                                       i     Ti = 21C

                                             pi = 1 bar

  Tank

                       Air compressor        ­+

        V = .28 m3
        T1 = 21C
        p1 = 1 bar
        pv1.4 = constant

                                                          Figure E4.13a
158 Chapter 4 Control Volume Analysis Using Energy

     Assumptions:

     1. The control volume is defined by the dashed line on the accompanying diagram.
                                                    #

     2. Because the tank is filled rapidly, Qcv is ignored.
     3. Kinetic and potential energy effects are negligible.
     4. The state of the air entering the control volume remains constant.
     5. The air stored within the air compressor and interconnecting pipes can be ignored.

 6. The relationship between pressure and specific volume for the air in the tank is pv1.4  constant.

     7. The ideal gas model applies for the air.

     Analysis: The required plots are developed using Interactive Thermodynamics: IT. The IT program is based on the follow-
     ing analysis. The pressure p in the tank at time t 7 0 is determined from

                              pv1.4  p1v11.4

where the corresponding specific volume v is obtained using the known tank volume V and the mass m in the tank at that
time. That is, v  Vm. The specific volume of the air in the tank initially, v1, is calculated from the ideal gas equation of
state and the known initial temperature, T1, and pressure, p1. That is

      RT1    a   8314  N   #  mb                    1294°K2              1  bar
       p1       28.97  kg  #  °K                                       105  N/m2
                              bar2
v1                     11                                           `              `   .8437 m3/kg

Once the pressure p is known, the corresponding temperature T can be found from the ideal gas equation of state, T  pvR.
    To determine the work, begin with the mass rate balance for the single-inlet control volume

                                                    dmcv    #
                                                     dt     mi

Then, with assumptions 2 and 3, the energy rate balance reduces to

                       dUcv                              #              #
                        dt                            Wcv              mihi

Combining the mass and energy rate balances and integrating using assumption 4 gives

                       ˘Ucv  Wcv  hi˘mcv

Denoting the work input to the compressor by Win  Wcv and using assumption 5, this becomes

                Win  mu  m1u1  1m  m12hi                                                            (1)

where m1 is the initial amount of air in the tank, determined from

             m1    V              .28 m3                                    0.332  kg
                   v1         0.8437 m3/kg

    As a sample calculation to validate the IT program below, consider the case m  0.664 kg, which corresponds to mm1  2.
The specific volume of the air in the tank at that time is

                v  V  0.28 m3  0.422 m3/kg
                      m 0.664 kg
                                                                                                         4.4 Transient Analysis 159

The corresponding pressure of the air is

                                          p      p1a  v1    1.4    11         0.8437 m3/kg 1.4
                                                      v                bar2 a 0.422 m3/kg b
                                                          b

                                              2.64 bars

and the corresponding temperature of the air is

                         T                   pv       12.64 bars2 1.422 m3/kg2          `  105  N/m2  `
                                             R                                               1  bar
                                                   Ł      a 8314           J     b  
                                                           28.97              °K
                                                                       kg

                                                  388°K 1114.9°C2

Evaluating u1, u, and hi at the appropriate temperatures from Table A-22, u1  209.8 kJ/kg, u  277.5 kJ/kg, hi  294.2
kJ/kg. Using Eq. (1), the required work input is

               Win  mu  m1u1  1m  m12hi

                10.664 kg2 a277.5 kJ b  10.332 kg2 a209.8 kJ b  10.332 kg2 a294.2 kJ b
                                                 kg                                 kg                   kg

                16.9 kJ

IT Program. Choosing SI units from the Units menu, and selecting Air from the Properties menu, the IT program for
solving the problem is

// Given data

p1 = 1 // bar
T1 = 21 // C
Ti = 21 // C
V = .28 // m3

n = 1.4

    // Determine the pressure and temperature for t > 0
    v1 = v_TP("Air", T1, p1)
    v = V/m
    p * v ^n = p1 * v1 ^n
    v = v_TP("Air", T, p)

    // Specify the mass and mass ratio r
    v1 = V/m1
    r = m/m1
    r=2

    // Calculate the work using Eq. (1)
    Win = m * u ­ m1 * u1 ­ hi * (m­m1)
    u1 = u_T("Air", T1)
    u = u_T("Air", T)
    hi = h_T("Air", Ti)

Using the Solve button, obtain a solution for the sample case r  mm1  2 considered above to validate the program. Good
agreement is obtained, as can be verified. Once the program is validated, use the Explore button to vary the ratio mm1 from
160 Chapter 4 Control Volume Analysis Using Energy

1 to 3 in steps of 0.01. Then, use the Graph button to construct the required plots. The results are:

5                                                                                    400

4                                                                                    350

                                                                                     300

3p, bars                                                                             250
                                                                              T, °C
2                                                                                    200

                                                                                     150

1                                                                                    100

0  1  1.5       2              2.5    3                                              50

                                                                                          1     1.5  2     2.5  3

                m/m1                                                                                 m/m1

                               60

                               50

                               40

                      Win, kJ  30

                               20

                               10

                               0   1  1.5  2                                         2.5     3

                                           m/m1

 Figure E4.13b

We conclude from the first two plots that the pressure and temperature each increase as the tank fills. The work required to
fill the tank increases as well. These results are as expected.

 This pressure-specific volume relationship is in accord with what might be measured. The relationship is also consistent

    with the uniform state idealization, embodied by Eqs. 4.25.

                                The final example of transient analysis is an application with a well-stirred tank. Such
                             process equipment is commonly employed in the chemical and food processing industries.

E X A M P L E 4 . 1 4 Temperature Variation in a Well-Stirred Tank

A tank containing 45 kg of liquid water initially at 45C has one inlet and one exit with equal mass flow rates. Liquid water
enters at 45C and a mass flow rate of 270 kg/h. A cooling coil immersed in the water removes energy at a rate of 7.6 kW.
The water is well mixed by a paddle wheel so that the water temperature is uniform throughout. The power input to the water
from the paddle wheel is 0.6 kW. The pressures at the inlet and exit are equal and all kinetic and potential energy effects can
be ignored. Plot the variation of water temperature with time.
                                                                                                                             4.4 Transient Analysis 161

SOLUTION
Known: Liquid water flows into and out of a well-stirred tank with equal mass flow rates as the water in the tank is cooled
by a cooling coil.
Find: Plot the variation of water temperature with time.
Schematic and Given Data:

Mixing                               m1 = 270 kg/h                             318
rotor
                                                         Water temperature, K
Constant
liquid level

                                     Tank

Boundary

                                     Cooling coil                              296

m2 = 270 kg/h                                                                       0               0.5      1.0

                                                                                                    Time, h        Figure E4.14

Assumptions:

     1. The control volume is defined by the dashed line on the accompanying diagram.

     2. For the control volume, the only significant heat transfer is with the cooling coil. Kinetic and potential energy effects can
     be neglected.

 3. The water temperature is uniform with position throughout: T  T(t).

     4. The water in the tank is incompressible, and there is no change in pressure between inlet and exit.

Analysis: The energy rate balance reduces with assumption 2 to

                                           dUcv       #                           #       m# 1h1    h22
                                            dt        Qcv                        Wcv

         #
where m denotes the mass flow rate.

The mass contained within the control volume remains constant with time, so the term on the left side of the energy rate

balance can be expressed as

                                                   dUcv                        d1mcvu2        du
                                                    dt                            dt      mcv dt

Since the water is assumed incompressible, the specific internal energy depends on temperature only. Hence, the chain rule
can be used to write

                                                    du                         du   dT     dT
                                                                                          c
                                                    dt dT dt dt

where c is the specific heat. Collecting results

                                                         dUcv                            dT
                                                          dt                        mcvc dt

With Eq. 3.20b the enthalpy term of the energy rate balance can be expressed as

                                                                                                          0

                                           h1  h2  c1T1  T22  v1p1  p2 2
162 Chapter 4 Control Volume Analysis Using Energy

  where the pressure term is dropped by assumption 4. Since the water is well mixed, the temperature at the exit equals the tem-
  perature of the overall quantity of liquid in the tank, so

                                                                 h1  h2  c1T1  T 2

  where T represents the uniform water temperature at time t.
      With the foregoing considerations the energy rate balance becomes

     mcvc        dT     #                                          #       #  1T1        T2
                 dt    Qcv                                        Wcv     mc

  As can be verified by direct substitution, the solution of this first-order, ordinary differential equation is

                            #                                          #            #
                          m                                          a Qcv
  T          C1  exp a                                 tb                           Wcv b    T1
                         mcv                                                  #
                                                                            mc

  The constant C1 is evaluated using the initial condition: at t  0, T  T1. Finally

                     #                                 #                               #
                   a Qcv                                                    expa m
  T          T1                                        Wcv b      c    1                     tb  d
                          #                                                         mcv
                          mc

  Substituting given numerical values together with the specific heat c for liquid water from Table A-19

  T  318 K       3 7.6  10.62 4 kJ/s                                                c 1  expa270 tb d
                                                                                                    45
             C   270   kg                           b  a4.2         kJ    b  S
              a        s                                          kg # K
                 3600

   318  22 31  exp16t2 4

  where t is in hours. Using this expression, we can construct the accompanying plot showing the variation of temperature with time.

   In this case idealizations are made about the state of the mass contained within the system and the states of the liquid en-

      tering and exiting. These idealizations make the transient analysis manageable.

   As t S , T S 296 K. That is, the water temperature approaches a constant value after sufficient time has elapsed. From

      the accompanying plot it can be seen that the temperature reaches its constant limiting value in about 1 h.

  Chapter Summary and Study Guide

The conservation of mass and energy principles for control        has been completed you should be able to
volumes are embodied in the mass and energy rate balances
developed in this chapter. Although the primary emphasis           write out the meanings of the terms listed in the margins
is on cases in which one-dimensional flow is assumed, mass           throughout the chapter and understand each of the
and energy balances are also presented in integral forms that        related concepts. The subset of key concepts listed below
provide a link to subsequent fluid mechanics and heat trans-         is particularly important in subsequent chapters.
fer courses. Control volumes at steady state are featured,
but discussions of transient cases are also provided.              list the typical modeling assumptions for nozzles and
                                                                     diffusers, turbines, compressors and pumps, heat
   The use of mass and energy balances for control volumes at        exchangers, and throttling devices.
steady state is illustrated for nozzles and diffusers, turbines,
compressors and pumps, heat exchangers, throttling devices, and    apply Eqs. 4.18­ 4.20 to control volumes at steady state,
integrated systems. An essential aspect of all such applications     using appropriate assumptions and property data for the
is the careful and explicit listing of appropriate assumptions.      case at hand.
Such model-building skills are stressed throughout the chapter.
                                                                   apply mass and energy balances for the transient analysis
   The following checklist provides a study guide for this chap-     of control volumes, using appropriate assumptions and
ter. When your study of the text and end-of-chapter exercises        property data for the case at hand.
                                                                               Problems: Developing Engineering Skills 163

Key Engineering Concepts

mass flow rate p. 122             volumetric flow rate                         energy rate balance p. 131  compressor p. 139
mass rate balance p. 122             p. 124                                    nozzle p. 134               pump p. 139
one-dimensional flow                                                           diffuser p. 134             heat exchanger p. 143
                                  steady state p. 125                          turbine p. 137              throttling process p. 148
   p. 124                         flow work p. 130

Exercises: Things Engineers Think About

1. Why does the relative velocity normal to the flow boundary,                 energy rate balances are important to describe steady-state
Vn, appear in Eqs. 4.3 and 4.8?                                                operation?

2. Why might a computer cooled by a constant-speed fan oper-                   9. When air enters a diffuser and decelerates, does its pressure
ate satisfactorily at sea level but overheat at high altitude?                 increase or decrease?

3. Give an example where the inlet and exit mass flow rates for                10. Even though their outer surfaces would seem hot to the touch,
a control volume are equal, yet the control volume is not at steady            large steam turbines in power plants might not be covered with
state.                                                                         much insulation. Why not?

            #                                                                  11. Would it be desirable for a coolant circulating inside the
4. Does Qcv accounting for energy transfer by heat include heat                engine of an automobile to have a large or a small specific heat
transfer across inlets and exits? Under what circumstances might               cp? Discuss.
heat transfer across an inlet or exit be significant?
                                                                               12. A hot liquid stream enters a counterflow heat exchanger at
5. By introducing enthalpy h to replace each of the (u  pv)                    Th,in, and a cold liquid stream enters at Tc,in. Sketch the variation
terms of Eq. 4.13, we get Eq. 4.14. An even simpler algebraic                  of temperature with location of each stream as it passes through
form would result by replacing each of the (u  pv  V22                         the heat exchanger.
gz) terms by a single symbol, yet we have not done so. Why not?
                                                                               13. What are some examples of commonly encountered devices
6. Simplify the general forms of the mass and energy rate bal-                 that undergo periods of transient operation? For each example,
ances to describe the process of blowing up a balloon. List all of             which type of system, closed system or control volume, would
your modeling assumptions.                                                     be most appropriate?

7. How do the general forms of the mass and energy rate bal-                   14. An insulated rigid tank is initially evacuated. A valve is
ances simplify to describe the exhaust stroke of a cylinder in an              opened and atmospheric air at 20C, 1 atm enters until the pres-
automobile engine? List all of your modeling assumptions.                      sure in the tank becomes 1 bar, at which time the valve is closed.
                                                                               Is the final temperature of the air in the tank equal to, greater
8. Waterwheels have been used since antiquity to develop me-                   than, or less than 20C?
chanical power from flowing water. Sketch an appropriate
control volume for a waterwheel. What terms in the mass and

Problems: Developing Engineering Skills

Applying Conservation of Mass                                                     in the amount of mass, in kg, in the control volume versus
                                                                                  time, in s, ranging from 0 to 3600 s.
4.1 The mass flow rate at the inlet of a one-inlet, one-exit con-
                                                  #                            4.3 A 0.5-m3 tank contains ammonia, initially at 40C, 8 bar.
trol  volume  varies  with  time  according  to  mi       10011     e  2t 2 ,     A leak develops, and refrigerant flows out of the tank at a con-
          #                                                                       stant mass flow rate of 0.04 kg/s. The process occurs slowly
where mi has units of kg/h and t is in h. At the exit, the mass                   enough that heat transfer from the surroundings maintains a
                                                                                  constant temperature in the tank. Determine the time, in s, at
flow rate is constant at 100 kg/h. The initial mass in the con-                   which half of the mass has leaked out, and the pressure in the
                                                                                  tank at that time, in bar.
trol volume is 50 kg.
                                                                               4.4 A water storage tank initially contains 400 m3 of water. The
(a) Plot the inlet and exit mass flow rates, the instantaneous                    average daily usage is 40 m3. If water is added to the tank at
     rate of change of mass, and the amount of mass contained                     an average rate of 20[exp(t20)] m3 per day, where t is time
     in the control volume as functions of time, for t ranging                    in days, for how many days will the tank contain water?
     from 0 to 3 h.
                                                                               4.5 A pipe carrying an incompressible liquid contains an
(b) Estimate the time, in h, when the tank is nearly empty.                       expansion chamber as illustrated in Fig. P4.5.

4.2 A control volume has one inlet and one exit. The mass flow#
                                                                     #
rates  in and out are,      respectively,    mi           1.5  and  me  
1.511   e0.002t2, where t   is in seconds              #
                                             and m is in kg/s. Plot

the time rate of change of mass, in kg/s, and the net change
164 Chapter 4 Control Volume Analysis Using Energy

(a) Develop an expression for the time rate of change of liq-                      is 350 m/s. The air behaves as an ideal gas. For steady-state
                                                                                   operation, determine
     uid level in the chamber, dLdt, in terms of the diameters
                                                                                   (a) the mass flow rate, in kg/s.
     D1, D2, and D, and the velocities V1 and V2.                           #      (b) the exit flow area, in cm2.

(b)  Compare        the  relative  magnitudes  of  the  mass   flow  rates  mi  4.9 Infiltration of outside air into a building through miscel-
           #                                                                       laneous cracks around doors and windows can represent a
     and m2 when dLdt  0, dLdt  0, and dLdt  0,                                    significant load on the heating equipment. On a day when the
                                                                                   outside temperature is ­18°C, 0.042 m3/s of air enters through
     respectively.                                                                 the cracks of a particular office building. In addition, door
                                                                                   openings account for about .047 m3/s of outside air infiltration.
Expansion                D                                                         The internal volume of the building is 566 m3, and the inside
chamber                                 L                                          temperature is 22°C. There is negligible pressure difference
                                                                                   between the inside and the outside of the building. Assuming
  V1                                                     V2                        ideal gas behavior, determine at steady state the volumetric
  m· 1                                                   m· 2                      flow rate of air exiting the building through cracks and other
                                                                                   openings, and the number of times per hour that the air within
                D1                         D2                                      the building is changed due to infiltration.

 Figure P4.5                                                                    4.10 Refrigerant 134a enters the condenser of a refrigeration
                                                                                   system operating at steady state at 9 bar, 50°C, through a
4.6 Velocity distributions for laminar and turbulent flow in a                     2.5-cm-diameter pipe. At the exit, the pressure is 9 bar, the
   circular pipe of radius R carrying an incompressible liquid of                  temperature is 30°C, and the velocity is 2.5 m/s. The mass flow
   density  are given, respectively, by                                            rate of the entering refrigerant is 6 kg/min. Determine

                   VV0  3 1  1rR22 4                                               (a) the velocity at the inlet, in m/s.
                   VV0  3 1  1rR2 4 17                                             (b) the diameter of the exit pipe, in cm.

   where r is the radial distance from the pipe centerline and V0               4.11 Steam at 160 bar, 480°C, enters a turbine operating at
   is the centerline velocity. For each velocity distribution                      steady state with a volumetric flow rate of 800 m3/min. Eighteen
                                                                                   percent of the entering mass flow exits at 5 bar, 240°C, with a
   (a) plot VV0 versus rR.                                                         velocity of 25 m/s. The rest exits at another location with
   (b) derive expressions for the mass flow rate and the average                   a pressure of 0.06 bar, a quality of 94%, and a velocity of
                                                                                   400 m/s. Determine the diameters of each exit duct, in m.
        velocity of the flow, Vave, in terms of V0, R, and , as re-
        quired.                                                                 4.12 Air enters a compressor operating at steady state with a
   (c) derive an expression for the specific kinetic energy carried                pressure of 1 bar, a temperature of 20°C, and a volumetric flow
       through an area normal to the flow. What is the percent er-                 rate of 0.25 m3/s. The air velocity in the exit pipe is 210 m/s
       ror if the specific kinetic energy is evaluated in terms of                 and the exit pressure is 1 MPa. If each unit mass of air passing
       the average velocity as (Vave)22?                                           from inlet to exit undergoes a process described by pv1.34 
                                                                                   constant, determine the exit temperature, in °C.
   Which velocity distribution adheres most closely to the ideal-
   izations of one-dimensional flow? Discuss.                                   4.13 Air enters a 0.6-m-diameter fan at 16°C, 101 kPa, and is
                                                                                   discharged at 18°C, 105 kPa, with a volumetric flow rate of
4.7 Vegetable oil for cooking is dispensed from a cylindrical                      0.35 m3/s. Assuming ideal gas behavior, determine for steady-
   can fitted with a spray nozzle. According to the label, the can                 state operation
   is able to deliver 560 sprays, each of duration 0.25 s and each
   having a mass of 0.25 g. Determine                                              (a) the mass flow rate of air, in kg/s.
                                                                                   (b) the volumetric flow rate of air at the inlet, in m3/s.
   (a) the mass flow rate of each spray, in g/s.                                   (c) the inlet and exit velocities, in m/s.
   (b) the mass remaining in the can after 560 sprays, in g, if the
                                                                                4.14 Ammonia enters a control volume operating at steady state
        initial mass in the can is 170 g.                                          at p1  14 bar, T1  28°C, with a mass flow rate of 0.5 kg/s.
                                                                                   Saturated vapor at 4 bar leaves through one exit, with a volu-
4.8 Air enters a one-inlet, one-exit control volume at 8 bar,                      metric flow rate of 1.036 m3/min, and saturated liquid at 4 bar
   600 K, and 40 m/s through a flow area of 20 cm2. At the exit,                   leaves through a second exit. Determine
   the pressure is 2 bar, the temperature is 400 K, and the velocity
                                                                                   (a) the minimum diameter of the inlet pipe, in cm, so the
                                                                                        ammonia velocity does not exceed 20 m /s.

                                                                                   (b) the volumetric flow rate of the second exit stream, in
                                                                                        m3/min.
                                                                           Problems: Developing Engineering Skills 165

4.15 At steady state, a stream of liquid water at 20°C, 1 bar is           (b) the diameters, in cm, of each of the supply pipes if the
   mixed with a stream of ethylene glycol (M  62.07) to form                    velocity in each is 2.5 m/s.
   a refrigerant mixture that is 50% glycol by mass. The water
   molar flow rate is 4.2 kmol/min. The density of ethylene gly-        4.16 Figure P4.16 shows a cooling tower operating at steady
   col is 1.115 times that of water. Determine                             state. Warm water from an air conditioning unit enters at 49°C
                                                                           with a mass flow rate of 0.5 kg/s. Dry air enters the tower at
   (a) the molar flow rate, in kmol/min, and volumetric flow rate,         21°C, 1 atm with a volumetric flow rate of 1.41 m3/s. Be-
        in m3/min, of the entering ethylene glycol.                        cause of evaporation within the tower, humid air exits at the

  Humid air
m· 4 = 1.64 kg/s

4                 Cooling tower                                            Air conditioning unit
         Fan             Warm water inlet
                           m· 1 = 0.5 kg/s

Spray heads       1 T1 = 49°C

                     Dry air

                  3  T3 = 21°C
                     p3 = 1 bar
                     (AV)3 = 1.41 m3/s

                  2 Return water Pump

Liquid               T2 = 27°C                                          +
                     m· 2 = m· 1                                        ­

              5 Makeup water                                                                       Figure P4.16

   top of the tower with a mass flow rate of 1.64 kg/s. Cooled             with a velocity of 460 m/s. Assuming ideal gas behavior and
   liquid water is collected at the bottom of the tower for return         neglecting potential energy effects, determine the heat transfer
   to the air conditioning unit together with makeup water.                per unit mass of air flowing, in kJ/kg.
   Determine the mass flow rate of the makeup water, in kg/s.
                                                                        4.21 Air enters an insulated diffuser operating at steady state
Energy Analysis of Control Volumes at Steady State                         with a pressure of 1 bar, a temperature of 300 K, and a veloc-
                                                                           ity of 250 m/s. At the exit, the pressure is 1.13 bar and the
4.17 Air enters a control volume operating at steady state at              velocity is 140 m/s. Potential energy effects can be neglected.
   1.05 bar, 300 K, with a volumetric flow rate of 12 m3/min and           Using the ideal gas model, determine
   exits at 12 bar, 400 K. Heat transfer occurs at a rate of 20 kW
   from the control volume to the surroundings. Neglecting ki-             (a) the ratio of the exit flow area to the inlet flow area.
   netic and potential energy effects, determine the power, in kW.         (b) the exit temperature, in K.

4.18 Steam enters a nozzle operating at steady state at 30 bar,         4.22 The inlet ducting to a jet engine forms a diffuser that
   320°C, with a velocity of 100 m/s. The exit pressure and tem-           steadily decelerates the entering air to zero velocity relative to
   perature are 10 bar and 200°C, respectively. The mass flow rate         the engine before the air enters the compressor. Consider a jet
   is 2 kg/s. Neglecting heat transfer and potential energy, determine     airplane flying at 1000 km/h where the local atmospheric pres-
                                                                           sure is 0.6 bar and the air temperature is 8°C. Assuming ideal
   (a) the exit velocity, in m/s.                                          gas behavior and neglecting heat transfer and potential energy
   (b) the inlet and exit flow areas, in cm2.                              effects, determine the temperature, in °C, of the air entering
                                                                           the compressor.
4.19 Methane (CH4) gas enters a horizontal, well-insulated noz-
   zle operating at steady state at 80°C and a velocity of 10 m/s.      4.23 Refrigerant 134a enters an insulated diffuser as a saturated
   Assuming ideal gas behavior for the methane, plot the tem-              vapor at 7 bars with a velocity of 370 m/s. At the exit, the pres-
   perature of the gas exiting the nozzle, in °C, versus the exit          sure is 16 bars and the velocity is negligible. The diffuser
   velocity ranging from 500 to 600 m/s.                                   operates at steady state and potential energy effects can be
                                                                           neglected. Determine the exit temperature, in °C.
4.20 Air enters an uninsulated nozzle operating at steady state
   at 420°K with negligible velocity and exits the nozzle at 290°K
166 Chapter 4 Control Volume Analysis Using Energy

4.24 Air expands through a turbine from 10 bar, 900 K to 1 bar,          (a) the mass flow rate of the steam at each of the two exits,
   500 K. The inlet velocity is small compared to the exit veloc-             in kg/h.
   ity of 100 m/s. The turbine operates at steady state and develops
   a power output of 3200 kW. Heat transfer between the turbine          (b) the diameter, in m, of the duct through which steam is ex-
   and its surroundings and potential energy effects are negligi-             tracted, if the velocity there is 20 m/s.
   ble. Calculate the mass flow rate of air, in kg/s, and the exit
   area, in m2.                                                       4.30 Air is compressed at steady state from 1 bar, 300 K, to
                                                                         6 bar with a mass flow rate of 4 kg/s. Each unit of mass pass-
4.25 A well-insulated turbine operating at steady state develops         ing from inlet to exit undergoes a process described by
   23 MW of power for a steam flow rate of 40 kg/s. The steam            pv1.27  constant. Heat transfer occurs at a rate of 46.95 kJ
   enters at 360°C with a velocity of 35 m /s and exits as saturated     per kg of air flowing to cooling water circulating in a water
   vapor at 0.06 bar with a velocity of 120 m /s. Neglecting             jacket enclosing the compressor. If kinetic and potential en-
   potential energy effects, determine the inlet pressure, in bar.       ergy changes of the air from inlet to exit are negligible, cal-
                                                                         culate the compressor power, in kW.
4.26 Nitrogen gas enters a turbine operating at steady state with
   a velocity of 60 m/s, a pressure of 0.345 Mpa, and a temper-       4.31 A compressor operates at steady state with Refrigerant 22
   ature of 700 K. At the exit, the velocity is 0.6 m/s, the pres-       as the working fluid. The refrigerant enters at 5 bar, 10°C, with
   sure is 0.14 Mpa, and the temperature is 390 K. Heat transfer         a volumetric flow rate of 0.8 m3/min. The diameters of the in-
   from the surface of the turbine to the surroundings occurs at a       let and exit pipes are 4 and 2 cm, respectively. At the exit, the
   rate of 36 kJ per kg of nitrogen flowing. Neglecting potential        pressure is 14 bar and the temperature is 90°C. If the magni-
   energy effects and using the ideal gas model, determine the           tude of the heat transfer rate from the compressor to its sur-
   power developed by the turbine, in kW.                                roundings is 5% of the compressor power input, determine the
                                                                         power input, in kW.
4.27 Steam enters a well-insulated turbine operating at steady
   state with negligible velocity at 4 MPa, 320°C. The steam ex-      4.32 Refrigerant 134a enters an air conditioner compressor at
   pands to an exit pressure of 0.07 MPa and a velocity of               3.2 bar, 10°C, and is compressed at steady state to 10 bar, 70°C.
   90 m/s. The diameter of the exit is 0.6 m. Neglecting poten-          The volumetric flow rate of refrigerant entering is 3.0 m3/min.
   tial energy effects, plot the power developed by the turbine,         The power input to the compressor is 55.2 kJ per kg of re-
   in kW, versus the steam quality at the turbine exit ranging           frigerant flowing. Neglecting kinetic and potential energy ef-
   from 0.9 to 1.0.                                                      fects, determine the heat transfer rate, in kW.

4.28 The intake to a hydraulic turbine installed in a flood con-      4.33 A compressor operating at steady state takes in 45 kg/min
   trol dam is located at an elevation of 10 m above the turbine         of methane gas (CH4) at 1 bar, 25°C, 15 m/s, and compresses
   exit. Water enters at 20°C with negligible velocity and exits         it with negligible heat transfer to 2 bar, 90 m/s at the exit. The
   from the turbine at 10 m/s. The water passes through the tur-         power input to the compressor is 110 kW. Potential energy
   bine with no significant changes in temperature or pressure be-       effects are negligible. Using the ideal gas model, determine the
   tween the inlet and exit, and heat transfer is negligible. The        temperature of the gas at the exit, in K.
   acceleration of gravity is constant at g  9.81 m/s2. If the
   power output at steady state is 500 kW, what is the mass flow      4.34 Refrigerant 134a is compressed at steady state from 2.4
   rate of water, in kg/s?                                               bar, 0°C, to 12 bar, 50°C. Refrigerant enters the compressor
                                                                         with a volumetric flow rate of 0.38 m3/min, and the power in-
4.29 A well-insulated turbine operating at steady state is               put to the compressor is 2.6 kW. Cooling water circulating
   sketched in Fig. P4.29. Steam enters at 3 MPa, 400°C, with a          through a water jacket enclosing the compressor experiences
   volumetric flow rate of 85 m3/min. Some steam is extracted            a temperature rise of 4°C from inlet to exit with a negligible
   from the turbine at a pressure of 0.5 MPa and a temperature           change in pressure. Heat transfer from the outside of the water
   of 180°C. The rest expands to a pressure of 6 kPa and a quality       jacket and all kinetic and potential energy effects can be
   of 90%. The total power developed by the turbine is 11,400 kW.        neglected. Determine the mass flow rate of the cooling water,
   Kinetic and potential energy effects can be neglected.                in kg/s.
   Determine

                   1                                                  4.35 Air enters a water-jacketed air compressor operating at
                                                                         steady state with a volumetric flow rate of 37 m3/min at 136
p1 = 3MPa             Turbine           Power out                        kPa, 305 K and exits with a pressure of 680 kPa and a tem-
T1 = 400°C              2                                                perature of 400 K. The power input to the compressor is
(AV)1 = 85 m3/min              3                                         155 kW. Energy transfer by heat from the compressed air to
                               p3 = 6 kPa                                the cooling water circulating in the water jacket results in an
p2 = 0.5 MPa                   x3 = 90%                                  increase in the temperature of the cooling water from inlet to
T2 = 180°C                                                               exit with no change in pressure. Heat transfer from the outside
V2 = 20 m/s                                                              of the jacket as well as all kinetic and potential energy effects
                                                                         can be neglected.
 Figure P4.29
                                                                                       Problems: Developing Engineering Skills 167

   (a) Determine the temperature increase of the cooling water,       of  the  liquid  entering  at  inlet  1  is  #     3.2    105  kg/h,  de-
        in K, if the cooling water mass flow rate is 82 kg/min.                                                    m1 #
                                                                      termine the mass flow rate at inlet 2, m2, in kg/h.
   (b) Plot the temperature increase of the cooling water, in K,
        versus the cooling water mass flow rate ranging from 75       4.42 The cooling coil of an air-conditioning system is a heat
        to 90 kg/min.                                                    exchanger in which air passes over tubes through which Re-
                                                                         frigerant 22 flows. Air enters with a volumetric flow rate of
4.36 A pump steadily delivers water through a hose terminated            40 m3/min at 27°C, 1.1 bar, and exits at 15°C, 1 bar. Refrig-
   by a nozzle. The exit of the nozzle has a diameter of 2.5 cm          erant enters the tubes at 7 bar with a quality of 16% and exits
   and is located 4 m above the pump inlet pipe, which has a di-         at 7 bar, 15°C. Ignoring heat transfer from the outside of the
   ameter of 5.0 cm. The pressure is equal to 1 bar at both the in-      heat exchanger and neglecting kinetic and potential energy
   let and the exit, and the temperature is constant at 20°C. The        effects, determine at steady state
   magnitude of the power input required by the pump is 8.6 kW,
   and the acceleration of gravity is g  9.81 m/s2. Determine         (a) the mass flow rate of refrigerant, in kg/min.
   the mass flow rate delivered by the pump, in kg/s.                 (b) the rate of energy transfer, in kJ/min, from the air to the

4.37 An oil pump operating at steady state delivers oil at a rate          refrigerant.
   of 5.5 kg/s and a velocity of 6.8 m/s. The oil, which can be
   modeled as incompressible, has a density of 1600 kg/m3 and         4.43 Refrigerant 134a flows at steady state through a long hor-
   experiences a pressure rise from inlet to exit of .28 Mpa. There      izontal pipe having an inside diameter of 4 cm, entering as
   is no significant elevation difference between inlet and exit,        saturated vapor at 8°C with a mass flow rate of 17 kg/min.
   and the inlet kinetic energy is negligible. Heat transfer between     Refrigerant vapor exits at a pressure of 2 bar. If the heat trans-
   the pump and its surroundings is negligible, and there is no          fer rate to the refrigerant is 3.41 kW, determine the exit tem-
   significant change in temperature as the oil passes through the       perature, in °C, and the velocities at the inlet and exit, each
   pump. If pumps are available in 14-horsepower increments,             in m/s.
   determine the horsepower rating of the pump needed for this
   application.                                                       4.44 Figure P4.44 shows a solar collector panel with a surface
                                                                         area of 2.97 m2. The panel receives energy from the sun at a
4.38 Ammonia enters a heat exchanger operating at steady state           rate of 1.5 kW. Thirty-six percent of the incoming energy is
   as a superheated vapor at 14 bar, 60°C, where it is cooled and        lost to the surroundings. The remainder is used to heat liquid
   condensed to saturated liquid at 14 bar. The mass flow rate of        water from 40C to 60C. The water passes through the solar
   the refrigerant is 450 kg/h. A separate stream of air enters the      collector with a negligible pressure drop. Neglecting kinetic
   heat exchanger at 17°C, 1 bar and exits at 42°C, 1 bar. Ignor-        and potential energy effects, determine at steady state the mass
   ing heat transfer from the outside of the heat exchanger and          flow rate of water, in kg. How many gallons of water at 60C
   neglecting kinetic and potential energy effects, determine the        can eight collectors provide in a 30-min time period?
   mass flow rate of the air, in kg/min.
                                                                                                                         A = 2.97 m2
4.39 A steam boiler tube is designed to produce a stream of sat-
   urated vapor at 200 kPa from saturated liquid entering at the                                 Solar collector panel        Water in
   same pressure. At steady state, the flow rate is 0.25 kg/min.                                             Water out        at 40°C
   The boiler is constructed from a well-insulated stainless steel
   pipe through which the steam flows. Electrodes clamped to the          1.5 kW                              at 60C
   pipe at each end cause a 10-V direct current to pass through             36% loss
   the pipe material. Determine the required size of the power
   supply, in kW, and the expected current draw, in amperes.                   Figure P4.44

4.40 Carbon dioxide gas is heated as it flows steadily through        4.45 As shown in Fig. P4.45, 15 kg/s of steam enters a desu-
   a 2.5-cm-diameter pipe. At the inlet, the pressure is 2 bar, the      perheater operating at steady state at 30 bar, 320C, where it
   temperature is 300 K, and the velocity is 100 m /s. At the exit,      is mixed with liquid water at 25 bar and temperature T2 to pro-
   the pressure and velocity are 0.9413 bar and 400 m /s, respec-        duce saturated vapor at 20 bar. Heat transfer between the de-
   tively. The gas can be treated as an ideal gas with constant          vice and its surroundings and kinetic and potential energy
   specific heat cp  0.94 kJ/kg  K. Neglecting potential energy          effects can be neglected.
   effects, determine the rate of heat transfer to the carbon
   dioxide, in kW.

4.41 A feedwater heater in a vapor power plant operates at
   steady state with liquid entering at inlet 1 with T1  45°C and
   p1  3.0 bar. Water vapor at T2  320°C and p2  3.0 bar
   enters at inlet 2. Saturated liquid water exits with a pressure
   of p3  3.0 bar. Ignore heat transfer with the surroundings and
   all kinetic and potential energy effects. If the mass flow rate
168 Chapter 4 Control Volume Analysis Using Energy

(a)      If  T2    200C,  determine        the  mass  flow  rate  of  liquid,  #    cal power. The rate of energy transfer by convection from the
                                                                               m2,  plate-mounted electronics is estimated to be 0.08 kW. Kinetic
                                                                                    and potential energy effects can be ignored. Determine the tube
         in kg/s.                                                                   diameter, in cm.

                                        3                                                                                                            Convection
                                                                                                                                                     cooling on
   Valve                  De-           p3 = 20 bar                                                                                                  top surface
1                     superheater       Saturated vapor

                                           Valve
                                                    2

p1 = 30 bar                             p2 = 25 bar
         320°C                          T2
Tm·11==  15 kg/s
                                                       Figure P4.45

(b)      Plot    #    in  kg/s, versus  T2  ranging from    20    to  220C.         2
                 m2,

4.46 A feedwater heater operates at steady state with liquid                                                           Electronic
                                                                                                                 + components
water entering at inlet 1 at 7 bar, 42C, and a mass flow rate                       T2 = 24°C  1                 ­

of 70 kg/s. A separate stream of water enters at inlet 2 as a

two-phase liquid­vapor mixture at 7 bar with a quality of 98%.                                 T1 = 20°C
                                                                                               V1 = 0.4 m/s
Saturated liquid at 7 bar exits the feedwater heater at 3. Ig-                                 Water

noring heat transfer with the surroundings and neglecting                            Figure P4.50

kinetic and potential energy effects, determine the mass flow

rate, in kg/s, at inlet 2.

4.47 The electronic components of Example 4.8 are cooled by

air flowing through the electronics enclosure. The rate of energy                   4.51 Electronic components are mounted on the inner surface
                                                                                       of a horizontal cylindrical duct whose inner diameter is 0.2 m,
transfer by forced convection from the electronic components                           as shown in Fig. P4.51. To prevent overheating of the elec-
                                                                                       tronics, the cylinder is cooled by a stream of air flowing
to the air is hA(Ts  Ta), where hA  5 W/K, Ts denotes the                              through it and by convection from its outer surface. Air enters
average surface temperature of the components, and Ta denotes                          the duct at 25C, 1 bar and a velocity of 0.3 m /s and exits with
the average of the inlet and exit air temperatures. Referring to                       negligible changes in kinetic energy and pressure at a temper-
                                                                                       ature that cannot exceed 40C. If the electronic components
Example 4.8 as required, determine the largest value of Ts, in                         require 0.20 kW of electric power at steady state, determine
C, for which the specified limits are met.                                             the minimum rate of heat transfer by convection from the cylin-
                                                                                       der's outer surface, in kW, for which the limit on the temper-
4.47 The electronic components of a computer consume 0.1 kW                            ature of the exiting air is met.

of electrical power. To prevent overheating, cooling air is sup-

plied by a 25-W fan mounted at the inlet of the electronics en-

closure. At steady state, air enters the fan at 20C, 1 bar and

exits the electronics enclosure at 35C. There is no significant

energy transfer by heat from the outer surface of the enclosure

to the surroundings and the effects of kinetic and potential en-

ergy can be ignored. Determine the volumetric flow rate of the                                               Convection cooling on outer surface
entering air, in m3/s.

4.49 Ten kg/min of cooling water circulates through a water

jacket enclosing a housing filled with electronic components.                          Air

At steady state, water enters the water jacket at 22C and exits                     T1 = 25°C
                                                                                    p1 = 1 bar 1
with a negligible change in pressure at a temperature that can-                     V1 = 0.3 m/s                                 T2  40°C
                                                                                    D1 = 0.2 m                             2 p2 = 1 bar
not exceed 26C. There is no significant energy transfer by heat
                                                                                     Figure P4.51                Electronic components
from the outer surface of the water jacket to the surroundings,                                                  mounted on inner surface

and kinetic and potential energy effects can be ignored.                                                     +­

Determine the maximum electric power the electronic compo-

nents can receive, in kW, for which the limit on the temperature

of the exiting water is met.

4.50 As shown in Fig. P4.50, electronic components mounted

on a flat plate are cooled by convection to the surroundings                        4.52 Ammonia enters the expansion valve of a refrigeration sys-
                                                                                       tem at a pressure of 1.4 MPa and a temperature of 32C and
and by liquid water circulating through a U-tube bonded to the                         exits at 0.08 MPa. If the refrigerant undergoes a throttling
                                                                                       process, what is the quality of the refrigerant exiting the
plate. At steady state, water enters the tube at 20C and a ve-                         expansion valve?

locity of 0.4 m /s and exits at 24C with a negligible change in

pressure. The electrical components receive 0.5 kW of electri-
                                                                                Problems: Developing Engineering Skills 169

4.53 Propane vapor enters a valve at 1.6 MPa, 70C, and                 4.56 Refrigerant 134a enters the flash chamber operating at
   leaves at 0.5 MPa. If the propane undergoes a throttling               steady state shown in Fig. P4.56 at 10 bar, 36C, with a mass
   process, what is the temperature of the propane leaving the            flow rate of 482 kg/h. Saturated liquid and saturated vapor exit
   valve, in C?                                                           as separate streams, each at pressure p. Heat transfer to the
                                                                          surroundings and kinetic and potential energy effects can be
4.54 A large pipe carries steam as a two-phase liquid­vapor               ignored.
   mixture at 1.0 MPa. A small quantity is withdrawn through a            (a) Determine the mass flow rates of the exiting streams, each
   throttling calorimeter, where it undergoes a throttling process             in kg/h, if p  4 bar.
   to an exit pressure of 0.1 MPa. For what range of exit tem-            (b) Plot the mass flow rates of the exiting streams, each in
   peratures, in C, can the calorimeter be used to determine the               kg/h, versus p ranging from 1 to 9 bar.
   quality of the steam in the pipe? What is the corresponding
   range of steam quality values?                                                                                                       3

4.55 As shown in Fig. P4.55, a steam turbine at steady state is
   operated at part load by throttling the steam to a lower pres-

              Valve                                                                   Valve               Saturated vapor,
                                                                              1                           pressure p
1                    2                           Power out                    p1 = 10 bar           Flash
                                                                              mT·11==3468°2Ckg/h    chamber
                            Turbine
                                                                        Figure P4.56                      Saturated liquid,
p1 = 1.5 MPa   p2 = 1 MPa                                                                                 pressure p
T1 = 320C
                                       3                                                                   2

                                           p3 = .08 bar
                                           x3 = 90%

 Figure P4.55

sure before it enters the turbine. Before throttling, the pressure     4.57 Air as an ideal gas flows through the turbine and heat ex-
and temperature are, respectively, 1.5 MPa and 320C. After                changer arrangement shown in Fig. P4.57. Data for the two
throttling, the pressure is 1 MPa. At the turbine exit, the steam         flow streams are shown on the figure. Heat transfer to the sur-
is at .08 bar and a quality of 90%. Heat transfer with the                roundings can be neglected, as can all kinetic and potential en-
surroundings and all kinetic and potential energy effects can             ergy effects. Determine T3, in K, and the power output of the
be ignored. Determine                                                     second turbine, in kW, at steady state.

(a) the temperature at the turbine inlet, in C.                        4.58 A residential heat pump system operating at steady state
(b) the power developed by the turbine, in kJ/kg of steam                 is shown schematically in Fig. P4.58. Refrigerant 134a circu-
                                                                          lates through the components of the system, and property data
     flowing.                                                             at the numbered locations are given on the figure. The mass

                           Turbine      ·                              Turbine   ·
                              1        Wt1 = 10,000 kW                    2     Wt2 = ?

               Air                  T2 = 1100 K          p3 = 4.5 bar           T4 = 980 K
               in 1                 p2 = 5 bar           T3 = ?                 p4 = 1 bar

               T1 = 1400 K             2                           3            4
               p1 = 20 bar
                                    6                                      T5 = 1480 K
                                                 Heat exchanger         5 pm·55==11.32500bakrg/min

                                    T6 = 1200 K                     Air
                                    p6 = 1 bar                      in

                                                                                                     Figure P4.57
170 Chapter 4 Control Volume Analysis Using Energy

flow rate of the refrigerant is 4.6 kg/min. Kinetic and poten-              flow rate of the water is 109 kg/s. Kinetic and potential energy
tial energy effects are negligible. Determine                               effects are negligible as are all stray heat transfers. Determine

(a) rate of heat transfer between the compressor and the sur-               (a) the thermal efficiency.
     roundings, in kJ/min.                                                  (b) the mass flow rate of the cooling water passing through

(b) the coefficient of performance.                                              the condenser, in kg/s.

   Return air                         Heated air to                      Transient Analysis
   from house                         house at T > 20°C                  4.60 A tiny hole develops in the wall of a rigid tank whose vol-
   at 20°C
                                                                            ume is 0.75 m3, and air from the surroundings at 1 bar, 25C
3 T3 = 30°C                                2     p2 = 8 bar                 leaks in. Eventually, the pressure in the tank reaches 1 bar. The
     p3 = 8 bar  Condenser                       h2 = 270 kJ/kg             process occurs slowly enough that heat transfer between the
                                                                            tank and the surroundings keeps the temperature of the air
      Expansion          Compressor                       Power input       inside the tank constant at 25C. Determine the amount of heat
      valve                                               to compressor     transfer, in kJ, if initially the tank
                                                          = 2.5 kW
                                                                            (a) is evacuated.
                 Evaporator                      p1 = 1.8 bar               (b) contains air at 0.7 bar, 25C.
                                                 T1 = ­10°C
4 T4 = ­12°C                                  1                          4.61 A rigid tank of volume 0.75 m3 is initially evacuated. A
                                                                            hole develops in the wall, and air from the surroundings at
     Air exits                        Outside air enters                    1 bar, 25C flows in until the pressure in the tank reaches 1 bar.
     at T < 0°C                       at 0°C                                Heat transfer between the contents of the tank and the sur-
                                                                            roundings is negligible. Determine the final temperature in the
 Figure P4.58                                                               tank, in C.

4.59 Figure P4.59 shows a simple vapor power plant operating             4.62 A rigid, well-insulated tank of volume 0.5 m3 is initially
   at steady state with water circulating through the components.           evacuated. At time t  0, air from the surroundings at 1 bar,
   Relevant data at key locations are given on the figure. The mass         21C begins to flow into the tank. An electric resistor trans-
                                                                            fers energy to the air in the tank at a constant rate of 100 W
    ·                                            Power out                  for 500 s, after which time the pressure in the tank is 1 bar.
   Q in                                                                     What is the temperature of the air in the tank, in C, at the
                                                                            final time?
          p1 = 100 bar
          T1 = 520°C                                                     4.63 The rigid tank illustrated in Fig. P4.63 has a volume of
                                                                            0.06 m3 and initially contains a two-phase liquid­vapor mix-
                             Turbine                                        ture of H2O at a pressure of 15 bar and a quality of 20%. As
                  1                                                         the tank contents are heated, a pressure-regulating valve keeps
                                                                            the pressure constant in the tank by allowing saturated vapor
                                                                            to escape. Neglecting kinetic and potential energy effects

                                                                            (a) determine the total mass in the tank, in kg, and the amount
                                                                                 of heat transfer, in kJ, if heating continues until the final
                                                                                 quality is x  0.5.

                                                                            (b) plot the total mass in the tank, in kg, and the amount of
                                                                                 heat transfer, in kJ, versus the final quality x ranging from
                                                                                 0.2 to 1.0.

                 p2 = 0.08 bar        2

   Steam         x2 = 90%                                                Pressure-regulating valve
   generator
                                                 Cooling
                                                 water in at 20°C

                 Condenser

4  p4 = 100 bar                                  Cooling                 V = 0.06 m3
   T4 = 43°C                                     water out at 35°C       p = 15 bar
                                                                         xinitial = 20%
                 Pump
                                                                                                            Figure P4.63
                 Power      3 p3 = 0.08 bar
                 in            Saturated liquid

 Figure P4.59
                                                                       Problems: Developing Engineering Skills 171

4.64 A well-insulated rigid tank of volume 10 m3 is connected          4.68 A well-insulated piston­cylinder assembly is connected by
   to a large steam line through which steam flows at 15 bar and          a valve to an air supply line at 8 bar, as shown in Fig. P4.68.
   280C. The tank is initially evacuated. Steam is allowed to flow        Initially, the air inside the cylinder is at 1 bar, 300 K, and the
   into the tank until the pressure inside is p.                          piston is located 0.5 m above the bottom of the cylinder. The
                                                                          atmospheric pressure is 1 bar, and the diameter of the piston
   (a) Determine the amount of mass in the tank, in kg, and the           face is 0.3 m. The valve is opened and air is admitted slowly
        temperature in the tank, in C, when p  15 bar.                    until the volume of air inside the cylinder has doubled. The
                                                                          weight of the piston and the friction between the piston and
   (b) Plot the quantities of part (a) versus p ranging from 0.1 to       the cylinder wall can be ignored. Using the ideal gas model,
        15 bar.                                                           plot the final temperature, in K, and the final mass, in kg, of
                                                                          the air inside the cylinder for supply temperatures ranging from
4.65 A tank of volume 1 m3 initially contains steam at 6 MPa              300 to 500 K.
   and 320C. Steam is withdrawn slowly from the tank until the
   pressure drops to p. Heat transfer to the tank contents main-          patm =
   tains the temperature constant at 320C. Neglecting all kinetic         1 bar
   and potential energy effects
                                                                                      Diameter = 0.3 m
   (a) determine the heat transfer, in kJ, if p  1.5 MPa.
   (b) plot the heat transfer, in kJ, versus p ranging from 0.5 to     L              Initially: L1 = 0.5 m

        6 MPa.                                                                        T1 = 300 K

4.66 A 1 m3 tank initially contains air at 300 kPa, 300 K. Air                        p1 = 1 bar
   slowly escapes from the tank until the pressure drops to 100
   kPa. The air that remains in the tank undergoes a process de-                      Valve
   scribed by pv1.2  constant. For a control volume enclosing                         Air supply line: 8 bar
   the tank, determine the heat transfer, in kJ. Assume ideal gas
   behavior with constant specific heats.                               Figure P4.68

4.67 A well-insulated tank contains 25 kg of Refrigerant 134a,
   initially at 300 kPa with a quality of 0.8 (80%). The pressure
   is maintained by nitrogen gas acting against a flexible bladder,
   as shown in Fig. P4.67. The valve is opened between the tank
   and a supply line carrying Refrigerant 134a at 1.0 MPa, 120C.
   The pressure regulator allows the pressure in the tank to re-
   main at 300 kPa as the bladder expands. The valve between
   the line and the tank is closed at the instant when all the liquid
   has vaporized. Determine the amount of refrigerant admitted
   to the tank, in kg.

Pressure-regulating  Nitrogen supply                                   4.69 Nitrogen gas is contained in a rigid 1-m tank, initially at
                                                                          10 bar, 300 K. Heat transfer to the contents of the tank occurs
valve                                                                     until the temperature has increased to 400 K. During the
                                                                          process, a pressure-relief valve allows nitrogen to escape,
               N2                                                         maintaining constant pressure in the tank. Neglecting kinetic
                                Flexible bladder                          and potential energy effects, and using the ideal gas model with
                                                                          constant specific heats evaluated at 350 K, determine the mass
       Refrigerant 134a                                                   of nitrogen that escapes, in kg, and the amount of energy trans-
            300 kPa Tank                                                  fer by heat, in kJ.

                              Line: 1000 kPa, 120 °C                   4.70 The air supply to a 56 m3 office has been shut off
                                                                          overnight to conserve utilities, and the room temperature has
 Figure P4.67                                                             dropped to 4C. In the morning, a worker resets the thermo-
                                                                          stat to 21C, and 6 m3/min of air at 50C begins to flow in
                                                                          through a supply duct. The air is well mixed within the room,
                                                                          and an equal mass flow of air at room temperature is with-
                                                                          drawn through a return duct. The air pressure is nearly 1 bar
                                                                          everywhere. Ignoring heat transfer with the surroundings and
                                                                          kinetic and potential energy effects, estimate how long it takes
                                                                          for the room temperature to reach 21C. Plot the room tem-
                                                                          perature as a function of time.
172 Chapter 4 Control Volume Analysis Using Energy

Design & Open Ended Problems: Exploring Engineering Practice

4.1D What practical measures can be taken by manufacturers                   Reflective                          Tap water
   to use energy resources more efficiently? List several specific           surface                     Inlet
   opportunities, and discuss their potential impact on profitabil-
   ity and productivity.                                               Glass or                                     Warm water
                                                                       clear plastic                                to storage
4.2D Methods for measuring mass flow rates of gases and liq-
   uids flowing in pipes and ducts include: rotameters, turbine          Tank                               Exit
   flowmeters, orifice-type flowmeters, thermal flowmeters, and
   Coriolis-type flowmeters. Determine the principles of opera-                                          Insulated walls
   tion of each of these flow-measuring devices. Consider the suit-                                      and hinged covers
   ability of each for measuring liquid or gas flows. Can any be
   used for two-phase liquid­vapor mixtures? Which measure vol-         Figure P4.6D
   umetric flow rate and require separate measurements of pres-
   sure and temperature to determine the state of the substance?          available head and the river flow, each of which varies con-
   Summarize your findings in a brief report.                             siderably throughout the year. Using U.S. Geological Survey
                                                                          data, determine the typical variations in head and flow for a
4.3D Wind turbines, or windmills, have been used for genera-              river in your locale. Based on this information, estimate the
   tions to develop power from wind. Several alternative wind tur-        total annual electric generation of a hydraulic turbine placed
   bine concepts have been tested, including among others the             on the river. Does the peak generating capacity occur at the
   Mandaras, Darrieus, and propeller types. Write a report in             same time of year as peak electrical demand in your area?
   which you describe the operating principles of prominent wind          Would you recommend that your local utility take advantage
   turbine types. Include in your report an assessment of the eco-        of this opportunity for electric power generation? Discuss.
   nomic feasibility of each type.
                                                                       4.8D Figure P4.8D illustrates an experimental apparatus for
4.4D Prepare a memorandum providing guidelines for selecting              steady-state testing of Refrigerant 134a shell-and-tube evap-
   fans for cooling electronic components. Consider the advan-            orators having a capacity of 100 kW. As shown by the dashed
   tages and disadvantages of locating the fan at the inlet of the        lines on the figure, two subsystems provide refrigerant and a
   enclosure containing the electronics. Repeat for a fan at the          water-glycol mixture to the evaporator. The water-glycol
   enclosure exit. Consider the relative merits of alternative fan        mixture is chilled in passing through the evaporator tubes, so
   types and of fixed- versus variable-speed fans. Explain how            the water-glycol subsystem must reheat and recirculate the
   characteristic curves assist in fan selection.                         mixture to the evaporator. The refrigerant subsystem must re-
                                                                          move the energy added to the refrigerant passing through the
4.5D Pumped-hydraulic storage power plants use relatively                 evaporator, and deliver saturated liquid refrigerant at 20C.
   inexpensive off-peak baseload electricity to pump water from           For each subsystem, draw schematics showing layouts of heat
   a lower reservoir to a higher reservoir. During periods of peak        exchangers, pumps, interconnecting piping, etc. Also, specify
   demand, electricity is produced by discharging water from the
   upper to the lower reservoir through a hydraulic turbine-                                             Refrigerant
   generator. A single device normally plays the role of the pump                                        subsystem
   during upper-reservoir charging and the turbine-generator
   during discharging. The ratio of the power developed during         Water-
   discharging to the power required for charging is typically         glycol
   much less than 100%. Write a report describing the features         subsystem
   of the pump-turbines used for such applications and their size
   and cost. Include in your report a discussion of the economic                         Shell-and-tube
   feasibility of pumped-hydraulic storage power plants.                                 evaporator

4.6D Figure P4.6D shows a batch-type solar water heater. With           Figure P4.8D
   the exit closed, cold tap water fills the tank, where it is heated
   by the sun. The batch of heated water is then allowed to flow
   to an existing conventional gas or electric water heater. If the
   batch-type solar water heater is constructed primarily from sal-
   vaged and scrap material, estimate the time for a typical fam-
   ily of four to recover the cost of the water heater from reduced
   water heating by conventional means.

4.7D Low-head dams (3 to 10 m), commonly used for flood
   control on many rivers, provide an opportunity for electric
   power generation using hydraulic turbine-generators. Esti-
   mates of this hydroelectric potential must take into account the
   the mass flow rates, heat transfer rates, and power require-     4.10D Smaller can be Better (see box Sec. 4.3). Investigate
   ments for each component within the subsystems, as                  the scope of current medical applications of MEMS. Write a
   appropriate.                                                        report including at least three references.

4.9D The stack from an industrial paint-drying oven discharges      4.11D Sensibly Built Homes Cost No More (see box Sec. 4.3).
   30 m3/min of gaseous combustion products at 240C. Investi-          In energy-efficient homes, indoor air quality can be a concern.
   gate the economic feasibility of installing a heat exchanger in     Research the issue of carbon monoxide and radon buildup in
   the stack to heat air that would provide for some of the space      tightly sealed houses. Write a report including at least three
   heating needs of the plant.                                         references.
                C            The Second
               H                      Law of
               A
                P   Thermodynamics

5T
                E
                R

chapter objective   E N G I N E E R I N G C O N T E X T The presentation to this point has
                    considered thermodynamic analysis using the conservation of mass and conservation of
                    energy principles together with property relations. In Chaps. 2 through 4 these fundamen-
                    tals are applied to increasingly complex situations. The conservation principles do not
                    always suffice, however, and often the second law of thermodynamics is also required for
                    thermodynamic analysis. The objective of this chapter is to introduce the second law of
                    thermodynamics. A number of deductions that may be called corollaries of the second law
                    are also considered, including performance limits for thermodynamic cycles. The current
                    presentation provides the basis for subsequent developments involving the second law in
                    Chaps. 6 and 7.

        5.1 Introducing the Second Law

                                The objectives of the present section are to (1) motivate the need for and the usefulness of
                                the second law, and (2) to introduce statements of the second law that serve as the point of
                                departure for its application.

                                 5.1.1 Motivating the Second Law

                                It is a matter of everyday experience that there is a definite direction for spontaneous
                                processes. This can be brought out by considering the three systems pictured in Fig. 5.1.

                                 System a. An object at an elevated temperature Ti placed in contact with atmospheric
                                   air at temperature T0 would eventually cool to the temperature of its much larger
                                   surroundings, as illustrated in Fig. 5.1a. In conformity with the conservation of energy
                                   principle, the decrease in internal energy of the body would appear as an increase in
                                   the internal energy of the surroundings. The inverse process would not take place
                                   spontaneously, even though energy could be conserved: The internal energy of the
                                   surroundings would not decrease spontaneously while the body warmed from T0 to its
                                   initial temperature.

                                 System b. Air held at a high pressure pi in a closed tank would flow spontaneously to
                                   the lower pressure surroundings at p0 if the interconnecting valve were opened, as
                                   illustrated in Fig. 5.1b. Eventually fluid motions would cease and all of the air would be

174
                                                                 5.1 Introducing the Second Law 175

Atmospheric air                     Q
at T0

Body at            Time  T0 < T < Ti            Time        T0
Ti > T0

Atmospheric air                (a)
at p0
                                                            Air
  Valve
                               Air                          at
     Air at
     pi > p0                           p0 < p < pi          p0

                               (b)

Mass                     Mass
               zi
                                    0 < z < zi        Mass

                                                         (c)
 Figure 5.1 Illustrations of spontaneous processes and the eventual attainment
of equilibrium with the surroundings. (a) Spontaneous heat transfer. (b) Sponta-
neous expansion. (c) Falling mass.

   at the same pressure as the surroundings. Drawing on experience, it should be clear that
   the inverse process would not take place spontaneously, even though energy could be
   conserved: Air would not flow spontaneously from the surroundings at p0 into the tank,
   returning the pressure to its initial value.
 System c. A mass suspended by a cable at elevation zi would fall when released, as
   illustrated in Fig. 5.1c. When it comes to rest, the potential energy of the mass in its
   initial condition would appear as an increase in the internal energy of the mass and its
   surroundings, in accordance with the conservation of energy principle. Eventually, the
   mass also would come to the temperature of its much larger surroundings. The inverse
   process would not take place spontaneously, even though energy could be conserved:
   The mass would not return spontaneously to its initial elevation while its internal energy
   or that of its surroundings decreased.

   In each case considered, the initial condition of the system can be restored, but not in a
spontaneous process. Some auxiliary devices would be required. By such auxiliary means
the object could be reheated to its initial temperature, the air could be returned to the tank
176 Chapter 5 The Second Law of Thermodynamics

                                and restored to its initial pressure, and the mass could be lifted to its initial height. Also in
                                each case, a fuel or electrical input normally would be required for the auxiliary devices to
                                function, so a permanent change in the condition of the surroundings would result.

                                    The foregoing discussion indicates that not every process consistent with the principle of
                                energy conservation can occur. Generally, an energy balance alone neither enables the pre-
                                ferred direction to be predicted nor permits the processes that can occur to be distinguished
                                from those that cannot. In elementary cases such as the ones considered, experience can be
                                drawn upon to deduce whether particular spontaneous processes occur and to deduce their
                                directions. For more complex cases, where experience is lacking or uncertain, a guiding
                                principle would be helpful. This is provided by the second law.

                                    The foregoing discussion also indicates that when left to themselves, systems tend to
                                undergo spontaneous changes until a condition of equilibrium is achieved, both internally
                                and with their surroundings. In some cases equilibrium is reached quickly, in others it is
                                achieved slowly. For example, some chemical reactions reach equilibrium in fractions of
                                seconds; an ice cube requires a few minutes to melt; and it may take years for an iron bar
                                to rust away. Whether the process is rapid or slow, it must of course satisfy conservation of
                                energy. However, that alone would be insufficient for determining the final equilibrium state.
                                Another general principle is required. This is provided by the second law.

                                      OPPORTUNITIES FOR DEVELOPING WORK

                                By exploiting the spontaneous processes shown in Fig. 5.1, it is possible, in principle, for
                                work to be developed as equilibrium is attained.  for example. . . instead of permit-
                                ting the body of Fig. 5.1a to cool spontaneously with no other result, energy could be delivered
                                by heat transfer to a system undergoing a power cycle that would develop a net amount of
                                work (Sec. 2.6). Once the object attained equilibrium with the surroundings, the process
                                would cease. Although there is an opportunity for developing work in this case, the oppor-
                                tunity would be wasted if the body were permitted to cool without developing any work. In
                                the case of Fig. 5.1b, instead of permitting the air to expand aimlessly into the lower-pressure
                                surroundings, the stream could be passed through a turbine and work could be developed.
                                Accordingly, in this case there is also a possibility for developing work that would not be
                                exploited in an uncontrolled process. In the case of Fig. 5.1c, instead of permitting the mass
                                to fall in an uncontrolled way, it could be lowered gradually while turning a wheel, lifting
                                another mass, and so on. 

                                    These considerations can be summarized by noting that when an imbalance exists between
                                two systems, there is an opportunity for developing work that would be irrevocably lost if
                                the systems were allowed to come into equilibrium in an uncontrolled way. Recognizing this
                                possibility for work, we can pose two questions:

                                 What is the theoretical maximum value for the work that could be obtained?
                                 What are the factors that would preclude the realization of the maximum value?

                                That there should be a maximum value is fully in accord with experience, for if it were
                                possible to develop unlimited work, few concerns would be voiced over our dwindling fuel
                                supplies. Also in accord with experience is the idea that even the best devices would be
                                subject to factors such as friction that would preclude the attainment of the theoretical
                                maximum work. The second law of thermodynamics provides the means for determining the
                                theoretical maximum and evaluating quantitatively the factors that preclude attaining the
                                maximum.
                                                                                                                    5.1 Introducing the Second Law 177

SECOND LAW SUMMARY

The preceding discussions can be summarized by noting that the second law and deductions
from it are useful because they provide means for

1. predicting the direction of processes.
2. establishing conditions for equilibrium.
3. determining the best theoretical performance of cycles, engines, and other devices.
4. evaluating quantitatively the factors that preclude the attainment of the best theoretical

   performance level.

Additional uses of the second law include its roles in

5. defining a temperature scale independent of the properties of any thermometric substance.
6. developing means for evaluating properties such as u and h in terms of properties that are

   more readily obtained experimentally.

Scientists and engineers have found many additional applications of the second law and
deductions from it. It also has been used in economics, philosophy, and other areas far
removed from engineering thermodynamics.

   The six points listed can be thought of as aspects of the second law of thermodynam-
ics and not as independent and unrelated ideas. Nonetheless, given the variety of these
topic areas, it is easy to understand why there is no single statement of the second law that
brings out each one clearly. There are several alternative, yet equivalent, formulations of
the second law.

   In the next section, two equivalent statements of the second law are introduced as a point
of departure for our study of the second law and its consequences. Although the exact
relationship of these particular formulations to each of the second law aspects listed above
may not be immediately apparent, all aspects listed can be obtained by deduction from these
formulations or their corollaries. It is important to add that in every instance where a con-
sequence of the second law has been tested directly or indirectly by experiment, it has been
unfailingly verified. Accordingly, the basis of the second law of thermodynamics, like every
other physical law, is experimental evidence.

 5.1.2 Statements of the Second Law

Among many alternative statements of the second law, two are frequently used in engineer-
ing thermodynamics. They are the Clausius and Kelvin­Planck statements. The objective of
this section is to introduce these two equivalent second law statements.

   The Clausius statement has been selected as a point of departure for the study of the
second law and its consequences because it is in accord with experience and therefore easy
to accept. The Kelvin­Planck statement has the advantage that it provides an effective
means for bringing out important second law deductions related to systems undergoing
thermodynamic cycles. One of these deductions, the Clausius inequality (Sec. 6.1), leads
directly to the property entropy and to formulations of the second law convenient for the
analysis of closed systems and control volumes as they undergo processes that are not
necessarily cycles.

CLAUSIUS STATEMENT OF THE SECOND LAW

The Clausius statement of the second law asserts that: It is impossible for any system to Clausius statement
operate in such a way that the sole result would be an energy transfer by heat from a
cooler to a hotter body.
178 Chapter 5 The Second Law of Thermodynamics

      Q Hot                     The Clausius statement does not rule out the possibility of transferring energy by heat
                             from a cooler body to a hotter body, for this is exactly what refrigerators and heat pumps
Yes!  Metal           No!    accomplish. However, as the words "sole result" in the statement suggest, when a heat trans-
      bar                    fer from a cooler body to a hotter body occurs, there must be some other effect within the
                     Q       system accomplishing the heat transfer, its surroundings, or both. If the system operates in
      Cold                   a thermodynamic cycle, its initial state is restored after each cycle, so the only place that
                             must be examined for such other effects is its surroundings.  for example. . . cooling
                             of food is accomplished by refrigerators driven by electric motors requiring work from their
                             surroundings to operate. The Clausius statement implies that it is impossible to construct a
                             refrigeration cycle that operates without an input of work. 

thermal reservoir            KELVIN­PLANCK STATEMENT OF THE SECOND LAW

Kelvin­Planck statement      Before giving the Kelvin­Planck statement of the second law, the concept of a thermal reser-
                             voir is introduced. A thermal reservoir, or simply a reservoir, is a special kind of system that
Thermal                      always remains at constant temperature even though energy is added or removed by heat
reservoir Qcycle             transfer. A reservoir is an idealization of course, but such a system can be approximated in
                             a number of ways--by the earth's atmosphere, large bodies of water (lakes, oceans), a large
No!                  Wcycle  block of copper, and a system consisting of two phases (although the ratio of the masses of
                             the two phases changes as the system is heated or cooled at constant pressure, the tempera-
System undergoing a          ture remains constant as long as both phases coexist). Extensive properties of a thermal reser-
thermodynamic cycle          voir such as internal energy can change in interactions with other systems even though the
                             reservoir temperature remains constant.

                                Having introduced the thermal reservoir concept, we give the Kelvin­Planck statement
                             of the second law: It is impossible for any system to operate in a thermodynamic cycle
                             and deliver a net amount of energy by work to its surroundings while receiving energy
                             by heat transfer from a single thermal reservoir. The Kelvin­Planck statement does not
                             rule out the possibility of a system developing a net amount of work from a heat trans-
                             fer drawn from a single reservoir. It only denies this possibility if the system undergoes
                             a thermodynamic cycle.

                                The Kelvin­Planck statement can be expressed analytically. To develop this, let us study
                             a system undergoing a cycle while exchanging energy by heat transfer with a single reser-
                             voir. The first and second laws each impose constraints:

                              A constraint is imposed by the first law on the net work and heat transfer between the
                                system and its surroundings. According to the cycle energy balance

                                                Wcycle  Qcycle

                                In words, the net work done by the system undergoing a cycle equals the net heat
                                transfer to the system. Although the cycle energy balance allows the net work Wcycle to
                                be positive or negative, the second law imposes a constraint on its direction, as
                                considered next.

                              According to the Kelvin­Planck statement, a system undergoing a cycle while
                                communicating thermally with a single reservoir cannot deliver a net amount of work
                                to its surroundings. That is, the net work of the cycle cannot be positive. However, the
                                Kelvin­Planck statement does not rule out the possibility that there is a net work
                                transfer of energy to the system during the cycle or that the net work is zero. Thus, the
                                analytical form of the Kelvin­Planck statement is

analytical form:                                Wcycle  0 1single reservoir2  (5.1)
Kelvin­Planck statement
                                                                                                                    5.1 Introducing the Second Law 179

where the words single reservoir are added to emphasize that the system communicates
thermally only with a single reservoir as it executes the cycle. In Sec. 5.3.1, we associ-
ate the "less than" and "equal to" signs of Eq. 5.1 with the presence and absence of int-
ernal irreversibilities, respectively. The concept of irreversibilities is considered in
Sec. 5.2.

   The equivalence of the Clausius and Kelvin­Planck statements can be demonstrated
by showing that the violation of each statement implies the violation of the other (see
box).

    D E M O N ST R AT I N G T H E E Q U I VA L E N C E O F T H E
    C L AU S I U S A N D K E LV I N ­ P L A N C K S TAT E M E N T S

   The equivalence of the Clausius and Kelvin­Planck statements is demonstrated by
   showing that the violation of each statement implies the violation of the other. That
   a violation of the Clausius statement implies a violation of the Kelvin­Planck state-
   ment is readily shown using Fig. 5.2, which pictures a hot reservoir, a cold reservoir,
   and two systems. The system on the left transfers energy QC from the cold reservoir
   to the hot reservoir by heat transfer without other effects occurring and thus violates
   the Clausius statement. The system on the right operates in a cycle while receiving
   QH (greater than QC) from the hot reservoir, rejecting QC to the cold reservoir, and
   delivering work Wcycle to the surroundings. The energy flows labeled on Fig. 5.2 are
   in the directions indicated by the arrows.

       Consider the combined system shown by a dotted line on Fig. 5.2, which consists
   of the cold reservoir and the two devices. The combined system can be regarded as
   executing a cycle because one part undergoes a cycle and the other two parts experi-
   ence no net change in their conditions. Moreover, the combined system receives en-
   ergy (QH  QC) by heat transfer from a single reservoir, the hot reservoir, and pro-
   duces an equivalent amount of work. Accordingly, the combined system violates the
   Kelvin­Planck statement. Thus, a violation of the Clausius statement implies a vio-
   lation of the Kelvin­Planck statement. The equivalence of the two second-law state-
   ments is demonstrated completely when it is also shown that a violation of the
   Kelvin­Planck statement implies a violation of the Clausius statement. This is left as
   an exercise.

System undergoing a
thermodynamic cycle

QC  Hot              QH
    reservoir

                                     Wcycle = QH ­ QC

QC  Cold             QC                                 Figure 5.2 Illustration used to
                                                       demonstrate the equivalence of the
    reservoir                                          Clausius and Kelvin­Planck state-
                                                       ments of the second law.
Dotted line defines combined system
180 Chapter 5 The Second Law of Thermodynamics

        5.2 Identifying Irreversibilities

                                One of the important uses of the second law of thermodynamics in engineering is to deter-
                                mine the best theoretical performance of systems. By comparing actual performance with the
                                best theoretical performance, insights often can be gained into the potential for improvement.
                                As might be surmised, the best performance is evaluated in terms of idealized processes. In
                                this section such idealized processes are introduced and distinguished from actual processes
                                involving irreversibilities.

irreversible process  IRREVERSIBLE PROCESSES
reversible processes
                      A process is called irreversible if the system and all parts of its surroundings cannot be
irreversibilities     exactly restored to their respective initial states after the process has occurred. A process is
                      reversible if both the system and surroundings can be returned to their initial states.
                      Irreversible processes are the subject of the present discussion. Reversible processes are
                      considered again later in the section.

                         A system that has undergone an irreversible process is not necessarily precluded from
                      being restored to its initial state. However, were the system restored to its initial state, it
                      would not be possible also to return the surroundings to the state they were in initially.
                      As illustrated below, the second law can be used to determine whether both the system
                      and surroundings can be returned to their initial states after a process has occurred. That
                      is, the second law can be used to determine whether a given process is reversible or
                      irreversible.

                         It might be apparent from the discussion of the Clausius statement of the second law that
                      any process involving a spontaneous heat transfer from a hotter body to a cooler body is
                      irreversible. Otherwise, it would be possible to return this energy from the cooler body to
                      the hotter body with no other effects within the two bodies or their surroundings. However,
                      this possibility is contrary to our experience and is denied by the Clausius statement.
                      Processes involving other kinds of spontaneous events are irreversible, such as an unre-
                      strained expansion of a gas or liquid considered in Fig. 5.1. Friction, electrical resistance,
                      hysteresis, and inelastic deformation are examples of effects whose presence during a process
                      renders it irreversible.

                         In summary, irreversible processes normally include one or more of the following
                      irreversibilities:

                       Heat transfer through a finite temperature difference

                       Unrestrained expansion of a gas or liquid to a lower pressure

                       Spontaneous chemical reaction

                       Spontaneous mixing of matter at different compositions or states

                       Friction--sliding friction as well as friction in the flow of fluids

                       Electric current flow through a resistance

                       Magnetization or polarization with hysteresis

                       Inelastic deformation

                         Although the foregoing list is not exhaustive, it does suggest that all actual processes are
                      irreversible. That is, every process involves effects such as those listed, whether it is a naturally
                      occurring process or one involving a device of our construction, from the simplest mecha-
                      nism to the largest industrial plant. The term "irreversibility" is used to identify any of these
                      effects. The list given previously comprises a few of the irreversibilities that are commonly
                      encountered.
5.2 Identifying Irreversibilities 181

   As a system undergoes a process, irreversibilities may be found within the system as              internal and external
well as within its surroundings, although in certain instances they may be located pre-              irreversibilities
dominately in one place or the other. For many analyses it is convenient to divide the ir-
reversibilities present into two classes. Internal irreversibilities are those that occur within
the system. External irreversibilities are those that occur within the surroundings, often
the immediate surroundings. As this distinction depends solely on the location of the
boundary, there is some arbitrariness in the classification, for by extending the boundary
to take in a portion of the surroundings, all irreversibilities become "internal." Nonethe-
less, as shown by subsequent developments, this distinction between irreversibilities is
often useful.

   Engineers should be able to recognize irreversibilities, evaluate their influence, and develop
practical means for reducing them. However, certain systems, such as brakes, rely on the
effect of friction or other irreversibilities in their operation. The need to achieve profitable
rates of production, high heat transfer rates, rapid accelerations, and so on invariably dictates
the presence of significant irreversibilities. Furthermore, irreversibilities are tolerated to some
degree in every type of system because the changes in design and operation required to reduce
them would be too costly. Accordingly, although improved thermodynamic performance can
accompany the reduction of irreversibilities, steps taken in this direction are constrained by
a number of practical factors often related to costs.

    for example. . . consider two bodies at different temperatures that are able to                  Hot, TH    Q
communicate thermally. With a finite temperature difference between them, a spontaneous                Area   Cold, TC
heat transfer would take place and, as discussed previously, this would be a source of
irreversibility. It might be expected that the importance of this irreversibility would di-
minish as the temperature difference approaches zero, and this is the case. From the study
of heat transfer (Sec. 2.4), we know that the transfer of a finite amount of energy by heat
between bodies whose temperatures differ only slightly would require a considerable
amount of time, a larger (more costly) heat transfer surface area, or both. To eliminate this
source of irreversibility, therefore, would require an infinite amount of time and/or an
infinite surface area. 

   Whenever any irreversibility is present during a process, the process must necessarily be ir-
reversible. However, the irreversibility of the process can be demonstrated using the
Kelvin­Planck statement of the second law and the following procedure: (1) Assume there
is a way to return the system and surroundings to their respective initial states. (2) Show that
as a consequence of this assumption, it would be possible to devise a cycle that produces
work while no effect occurs other than a heat transfer from a single reservoir. Since the ex-
istence of such a cycle is denied by the Kelvin­Planck statement, the initial assumption must
be in error and it follows that the process is irreversible. This approach can be used to demon-
strate that processes involving friction (see box), heat transfer through a finite temperature
difference, the unrestrained expansion of a gas or liquid to a lower pressure, and other effects
from the list given previously are irreversible. However, in most instances the use of the
Kelvin­Planck statement to demonstrate the irreversibility of processes is cumbersome. It is
normally easier to use the entropy production concept (Sec. 6.5).

D E M O N S T R AT I N G I R R E V E R S I B I L I T Y: F R I C T I O N

Let us use the Kelvin­Planck statement to demonstrate the irreversibility of a process
involving friction. Consider a system consisting of a block of mass m and an inclined
plane. Initially the block is at rest at the top of the incline. The block then slides down
182 Chapter 5 The Second Law of Thermodynamics

the plane, eventually coming to rest at a lower elevation. There is no significant heat

transfer between the system and its surroundings during the process.

    Applying the closed system energy balance

                                                0  00

    1Uf  Ui2  mg1zf  zi2  1KEf  KEi2  Q  W

or

                                      Uf  Ui  mg1zi  zf2

where U denotes the internal energy of the block-plane system and z is the elevation
of the block. Thus, friction between the block and plane during the process acts to
convert the potential energy decrease of the block to internal energy of the overall
system. Since no work or heat interactions occur between the system and its sur-
roundings, the condition of the surroundings remains unchanged during the process.
This allows attention to be centered on the system only in demonstrating that the
process is irreversible.

   When the block is at rest after sliding down the plane, its elevation is zf and the in-
ternal energy of the block­plane system is Uf. To demonstrate that the process is irre-
versible using the Kelvin­Planck statement, let us take this condition of the system,
shown in Fig. 5.3a, as the initial state of a cycle consisting of three processes. We imag-
ine that a pulley­cable arrangement and a thermal reservoir are available to assist in
the demonstration.

Process 1: Assume that the inverse process can occur with no change in the sur-
      roundings. That is, as shown in Fig. 5.3b, assume that the block returns sponta-
      neously to its initial elevation and the internal energy of the system decreases to
      its initial value, Ui. (This is the process we want to demonstrate is impossible.)

Process 2: As shown in Fig. 5.3c, use the pulley­cable arrangement provided to lower
      the block from zi to zf, allowing the decrease in potential energy to do work by
      lifting another mass located in the surroundings. The work done by the system
      equals the decrease in the potential energy of the block: mg(zi  zf).

Process 3: The internal energy of the system can be increased from Ui to Uf by bring-
      ing it into communication with the reservoir, as shown in Fig. 5.3d. The heat trans-
      fer required is Q  Uf  Ui. Or, with the result of the energy balance on the system
      given above, Q  mg(zi ­ zf). At the conclusion of this process the block is again at
      elevation zf and the internal energy of the block­plane system is restored to Uf.

   The net result of this cycle is to draw energy from a single reservoir by heat
transfer and produce an equivalent amount of work. There are no other effects.
However, such a cycle is denied by the Kelvin­Planck statement. Since both the
heating of the system by the reservoir (Process 3) and the lowering of the mass by
the pulley­cable while work is done (Process 2) are possible, it can be concluded
that it is Process 1 that is impossible. Since Process 1 is the inverse of the original
process where the block slides down the plane, it follows that the original process
is irreversible.

REVERSIBLE PROCESSES

A process of a system is reversible if the system and all parts of its surroundings can be
exactly restored to their respective initial states after the process has taken place. It should
be evident from the discussion of irreversible processes that reversible processes are purely
hypothetical. Clearly, no process can be reversible that involves spontaneous heat transfer
                                                                    5.2 Identifying Irreversibilities 183

                           zi
     Block

     zf

(a)                               (b)

         Reservoir

                               Q

                                        Figure 5.3 Figure used to

                                       demonstrate the irreversibility of a

(c)                               (d)  process involving friction.

through a finite temperature difference, an unrestrained expansion of a gas or liquid, friction,
or any of the other irreversibilities listed previously. In a strict sense of the word, a reversible
process is one that is perfectly executed.

   All actual processes are irreversible. Reversible processes do not occur. Even so, certain
processes that do occur are approximately reversible. The passage of a gas through a properly
designed nozzle or diffuser is an example (Sec. 6.8). Many other devices also can be made
to approach reversible operation by taking measures to reduce the significance of irre-
versibilities, such as lubricating surfaces to reduce friction. A reversible process is the limiting
case as irreversibilities, both internal and external, are reduced further and further.

   Although reversible processes cannot actually occur, they can be imagined. Earlier in this
section we considered how heat transfer would approach reversibility as the temperature dif-
ference approaches zero. Let us consider two additional examples:

 A particularly elementary example is a pendulum oscillating in an evacuated space. The
   pendulum motion approaches reversibility as friction at the pivot point is reduced. In
   the limit as friction is eliminated, the states of both the pendulum and its surroundings
   would be completely restored at the end of each period of motion. By definition, such a
   process is reversible.

 A system consisting of a gas adiabatically compressed and expanded in a frictionless

piston­cylinder assembly provides another example. With a very small increase in the

external pressure, the piston would compress the gas slightly. At each intermediate volume

during the compression, the intensive properties T, p, v, etc. would be uniform through-

out: The gas would pass through a series of equilibrium states. With a small decrease in              Gas

the external pressure, the piston would slowly move out as the gas expands. At each inter-

mediate volume of the expansion, the intensive properties of the gas would be at the same

uniform values they had at the corresponding step during the compression. When the gas

volume returned to its initial value, all properties would be restored to their initial values

as well. The work done on the gas during the compression would equal the work done by

the gas during the expansion. If the work between the system and its surroundings were

delivered to, and received from, a frictionless pulley­mass assembly, or the equivalent,

there would also be no net change in the surroundings. This process would be reversible.
184 Chapter 5 The Second Law of Thermodynamics

internally reversible         INTERNALLY REVERSIBLE PROCESSES
process
                              In an irreversible process, irreversibilities are present within the system, its surroundings, or
  METHODOLOGY                 both. A reversible process is one in which there are no internal or external irreversibilities.
  UPDATE                      An internally reversible process is one in which there are no irreversibilities within the
                              system. Irreversibilities may be located within the surroundings, however, as when there is
 Using the internally re-     heat transfer between a portion of the boundary that is at one temperature and the surroundings
 versible process concept,    at another.
 we refine the definition of
 the thermal reservoir in-       At every intermediate state of an internally reversible process of a closed system, all in-
 troduced in Sec. 5.1.2. In   tensive properties are uniform throughout each phase present. That is, the temperature,
 subsequent discussions       pressure, specific volume, and other intensive properties do not vary with position. If there
 we assume that no inter-     were a spatial variation in temperature, say, there would be a tendency for a spontaneous
 nal irreversibilities are    energy transfer by conduction to occur within the system in the direction of decreasing
 present within a thermal     temperature. For reversibility, however, no spontaneous processes can be present. From these
 reservoir. That is, every    considerations it can be concluded that the internally reversible process consists of a series
 process of a thermal         of equilibrium states: It is a quasiequilibrium process. To avoid having two terms that refer
 reservoir is internally      to the same thing, in subsequent discussions we will refer to any such process as an internally
 reversible.                  reversible process.

                                 The use of the internally reversible process concept in thermodynamics is comparable to
                              the idealizations made in mechanics: point masses, frictionless pulleys, rigid beams, and so
                              on. In much the same way as these are used in mechanics to simplify an analysis and arrive
                              at a manageable model, simple thermodynamic models of complex situations can be obtained
                              through the use of internally reversible processes. Initial calculations based on internally
                              reversible processes would be adjusted with efficiencies or correction factors to obtain
                              reasonable estimates of actual performance under various operating conditions. Internally
                              reversible processes are also useful in determining the best thermodynamic performance of
                              systems.

                              5.3 Applying the Second Law to
                                        Thermodynamic Cycles

                              Several important applications of the second law related to power cycles and refrigera-
                              tion and heat pump cycles are presented in this section. These applications further our
                              understanding of the implications of the second law and provide the basis for important
                              deductions from the second law introduced in subsequent sections. Familiarity with ther-
                              modynamic cycles is required, and we recommend that you review Sec. 2.6, where cy-
                              cles are considered from an energy, or first law, perspective and the thermal efficiency of
                              power cycles and coefficients of performance for refrigeration and heat pump cycles are
                              introduced.

   Wcycle  0                   5.3.1 Interpreting the Kelvin­Planck Statement
1single reservoir2
                              Let us reconsider Eq. 5.1, the analytical form of the Kelvin­Planck statement of the second
                              law. Equation 5.1 is employed in subsequent sections to obtain a number of significant
                              deductions. In each of these applications, the following idealizations are assumed: The ther-
                              mal reservoir and the portion of the surroundings with which work interactions occur are free
                              of irreversibilities. This allows the "less than" sign to be associated with irreversibilities within
                              the system of interest. The "equal to" sign is employed only when no irreversibilities of any
                              kind are present. (See box.)
          Thermal reservoir                              5.3 Applying the Second Law to Thermodynamic Cycles 185
                        Heat
                        transfer         Figure 5.4 System undergoing a cycle while
                                        exchanging energy by heat transfer with a single
System                                  thermal reservoir.
Boundary

                                  Mass

AS S O C I AT I N G S I G N S W I T H T H E
K E LV I N ­ P L A N C K S TAT E M E N T

Consider a system that undergoes a cycle while exchanging energy by heat transfer
with a single reservoir, as shown in Fig. 5.4. Work is delivered to, or received from,
the pulley­mass assembly located in the surroundings. A flywheel, spring, or some
other device also can perform the same function. In subsequent applications of Eq. 5.1,
the irreversibilities of primary interest are internal irreversibilities. To eliminate extra-
neous factors in such applications, therefore, assume that these are the only irre-
versibilities present. Hence, the pulley­mass assembly, flywheel, or other device to
which work is delivered, or from which it is received, is idealized as free of
irreversibilities. The thermal reservoir is also assumed free of irreversibilities.

   To demonstrate the correspondence of the "equal to" sign of Eq. 5.1 with the ab-
sence of irreversibilities, consider a cycle operating as shown in Fig. 5.4 for which the
equality applies. At the conclusion of one cycle,

 The system would necessarily be returned to its initial state.

 Since Wcycle  0, there would be no net change in the elevation of the mass used
   to store energy in the surroundings.

 Since Wcycle  Qcycle, it follows that Qcycle  0, so there also would be no net
   change in the condition of the reservoir.

Thus, the system and all elements of its surroundings would be exactly restored to their
respective initial conditions. By definition, such a cycle is reversible. Accordingly, there
can be no irreversibilities present within the system or its surroundings. It is left as an
exercise to show the converse: If the cycle occurs reversibly, the equality applies. Since a
cycle is either reversible or irreversible, it follows that the inequality sign implies the
presence of irreversibilities, and the inequality applies whenever irreversibilities are
present.

 5.3.2 Power Cycles Interacting with Two Reservoirs

A significant limitation on the performance of systems undergoing power cycles can be
brought out using the Kelvin­Planck statement of the second law. Consider Fig. 5.5, which
shows a system that executes a cycle while communicating thermally with two thermal
reservoirs, a hot reservoir and a cold reservoir, and developing net work Wcycle. The thermal
186 Chapter 5 The Second Law of Thermodynamics

                                                     Hot
                                                     reservoir QH

                             Boundary                              Wcycle = QH ­ QC

                                       Cold       QC                                       Figure 5.5 System undergoing a power
                                       reservoir                                          cycle while exchanging energy by heat transfer
                                                                                          with two reservoirs.

                             efficiency of the cycle is

  METHODOLOGY                                                      h  Wcycle  1  QC  (5.2)
  UPDATE                                                           QH  QH

 The energy transfers        where QH is the amount of energy received by the system from the hot reservoir by heat
 labeled on Fig 5.5 are      transfer and QC is the amount of energy discharged from the system to the cold reservoir by
 positive in the directions  heat transfer.
 indicated by the arrows.
                                If the value of QC were zero, the system of Fig. 5.5 would withdraw energy QH from the
Carnot corollaries           hot reservoir and produce an equal amount of work, while undergoing a cycle. The thermal ef-
                             ficiency of such a cycle would have a value of unity (100%). However, this method of operation
                             would violate the Kelvin­Planck statement and thus is not allowed. It follows that for any sys-
                             tem executing a power cycle while operating between two reservoirs, only a portion of the heat
                             transfer QH can be obtained as work, and the remainder, QC, must be discharged by heat trans-
                             fer to the cold reservoir. That is, the thermal efficiency must be less than 100%. In arriving at
                             this conclusion it was not necessary to (1) identify the nature of the substance contained within
                             the system, (2) specify the exact series of processes making up the cycle, or (3) indicate whether
                             the processes are actual processes or somehow idealized. The conclusion that the thermal effi-
                             ciency must be less than 100% applies to all power cycles whatever their details of operation.
                             This may be regarded as a corollary of the second law. Other corollaries follow.

                             CARNOT COROLLARIES. Since no power cycle can have a thermal efficiency of 100%, it
                             is of interest to investigate the maximum theoretical efficiency. The maximum theoretical
                             efficiency for systems undergoing power cycles while communicating thermally with two
                             thermal reservoirs at different temperatures is evaluated in Sec. 5.5 with reference to the
                             following two corollaries of the second law, called the Carnot corollaries.

                              The thermal efficiency of an irreversible power cycle is always less than the thermal
                                efficiency of a reversible power cycle when each operates between the same two
                                thermal reservoirs.

                              All reversible power cycles operating between the same two thermal reservoirs have the
                                same thermal efficiency.

                             A cycle is considered reversible when there are no irreversibilities within the system as it
                             undergoes the cycle and heat transfers between the system and reservoirs occur reversibly.

                                The idea underlying the first Carnot corollary is in agreement with expectations stemming
                             from the discussion of the second law thus far. Namely, the presence of irreversibilities dur-
                             ing the execution of a cycle is expected to exact a penalty. If two systems operating between
                             the same reservoirs each receive the same amount of energy QH and one executes a reversible
                             cycle while the other executes an irreversible cycle, it is in accord with intuition that the net
                             work developed by the irreversible cycle will be less, and it will therefore have the smaller
                             thermal efficiency.
                                                                                   5.3 Applying the Second Law to Thermodynamic Cycles 187

   The second Carnot corollary refers only to reversible cycles. All processes of a re-
versible cycle are perfectly executed. Accordingly, if two reversible cycles operating be-
tween the same reservoirs each receive the same amount of energy QH but one could
produce more work than the other, it could only be as a result of more advantageous se-
lections for the substance making up the system (it is conceivable that, say, air might be
better than water vapor) or the series of processes making up the cycle (nonflow processes
might be preferable to flow processes). This corollary denies both possibilities and indi-
cates that the cycles must have the same efficiency whatever the choices for the working
substance or the series of processes.

   The two Carnot corollaries can be demonstrated using the Kelvin­Planck statement of the
second law (see box).

    D E M O N ST R AT I N G T H E CA R N OT CO R O L L A R I E S

   The first Carnot corollary can be demonstrated using the arrangement of Fig. 5.6. A
   reversible power cycle R and an irreversible power cycle I operate between the same
   two reservoirs and each receives the same amount of energy QH from the hot reser-
   voir. The reversible cycle produces work WR while the irreversible cycle produces
   work WI. In accord with the conservation of energy principle, each cycle discharges
   energy to the cold reservoir equal to the difference between QH and the work pro-
   duced. Let R now operate in the opposite direction as a refrigeration (or heat pump)
   cycle. Since R is reversible, the magnitudes of the energy transfers WR, QH, and QC
   remain the same, but the energy transfers are oppositely directed, as shown by the
   dashed lines on Fig. 5.6. Moreover, with R operating in the opposite direction, the hot
   reservoir would experience no net change in its condition since it would receive QH
   from R while passing QH to I.

       The demonstration of the first Carnot corollary is completed by considering the
   combined system shown by the dotted line on Fig. 5.6, which consists of the two cy-
   cles and the hot reservoir. Since its parts execute cycles or experience no net change,
   the combined system operates in a cycle. Moreover, the combined system exchanges
   energy by heat transfer with a single reservoir: the cold reservoir. Accordingly, the com-
   bined system must satisfy Eq. 5.1 expressed as

                                    Wcycle 6 0 1single reservoir2

   where the inequality is used because the combined system is irreversible in its opera-
   tion since irreversible cycle I is one of its parts. Evaluating Wcycle for the combined
   system in terms of the work amounts WI and WR, the above inequality becomes

                                               WI  WR 6 0

   which shows that WI must be less than WR. Since each cycle receives the same energy
   input, QH, it follows that I  R and this completes the demonstration.

       The second Carnot corollary can be demonstrated in a parallel way by considering
   any two reversible cycles R1 and R2 operating between the same two reservoirs. Then,
   letting R1 play the role of R and R2 the role of I in the previous development, a com-
   bined system consisting of the two cycles and the hot reservoir may be formed that
   must obey Eq. 5.1. However, in applying Eq. 5.1 to this combined system, the equal-
   ity is used because the system is reversible in operation. Thus, it can be concluded that
   WR1  WR2, and therefore, R1  R2. The details are left as an exercise.
188 Chapter 5 The Second Law of Thermodynamics

    Dotted line defines combined system

                     Hot reservoir

                     QH                            QH

WR             R                                I           WI

          QC = QH ­ WR QC = QH ­ WI                                    Figure 5.6 Sketch for demonstrating that a
                     Cold reservoir                                   reversible cycle R is more efficient than an
                                                                      irreversible cycle I when they operate between
                                                                      the same two reservoirs.

 5.3.3 Refrigeration and Heat Pump Cycles
                Interacting with Two Reservoirs

The second law of thermodynamics places limits on the performance of refrigeration and
heat pump cycles as it does for power cycles. Consider Fig. 5.7, which shows a system
undergoing a cycle while communicating thermally with two thermal reservoirs, a hot and a
cold reservoir. The energy transfers labeled on the figure are in the directions indicated by
the arrows. In accord with the conservation of energy principle, the cycle discharges energy
QH by heat transfer to the hot reservoir equal to the sum of the energy QC received by heat
transfer from the cold reservoir and the net work input. This cycle might be a refrigeration
cycle or a heat pump cycle, depending on whether its function is to remove energy QC from
the cold reservoir or deliver energy QH to the hot reservoir.

   For a refrigeration cycle the coefficient of performance is

                                                       b     QC          QC   (5.3)
                                                            Wcycle    QH  QC

The coefficient of performance for a heat pump cycle is

                                                       g     QH          QH   (5.4)
                                                            Wcycle    QH  QC

As the net work input to the cycle Wcycle tends to zero, the coefficients of performance given
by Eqs. 5.3 and 5.4 approach a value of infinity. If Wcycle were identically zero, the system
of Fig. 5.7 would withdraw energy QC from the cold reservoir and deliver energy QC to the
hot reservoir, while undergoing a cycle. However, this method of operation would violate the
Clausius statement of the second law and thus is not allowed. It follows that these coeffi-
cients of performance must invariably be finite in value. This may be regarded as another
corollary of the second law. Further corollaries follow.

          Hot        QH =

          reservoir QC + Wcycle

Boundary                                        Wcycle = QH ­ QC

          Cold       QC                                                 Figure 5.7 System undergoing a refrigera-
          reservoir                                                    tion or heat pump cycle while exchanging energy
                                                                       by heat transfer with two reservoirs.
                                                              5.3 Applying the Second Law to Thermodynamic Cycles 189

Thermodynamics in the News...

Urban Heat Islands Worrisome                                      City planners are com-
                                                              bating heat islands. In
Warm blankets of pollution-laden air surround major cities.   Chicago, the once gravel-
Sunlight-absorbing rooftops and expanses of pavement, to-     roofed City Hall is now
gether with little greenery, conspire with other features of  topped by a garden, with
city living to raise urban temperatures as much as 10F        20,000 vines, shrubs, and
above adjacent rural areas. Health-care professionals worry   trees that absorb solar en-
about the impact of these "heat islands," especially on the   ergy without increasing the
elderly.                                                      roof temperature. The roof
                                                              temperature in August is as
    Paradoxically, the hot exhaust from the air conditioners  much as 75F cooler than on
city dwellers use to keep cool also make sweltering           nearby buildings, city
neighborhoods even hotter. Recent studies indicate that air-  sources report.
conditioner exhaust accounts for as much as 2F of the urban
temperature rise. Vehicles and commercial activity also
contribute.

COROLLARIES FOR REFRIGERATION AND HEAT PUMP CYCLES. The maximum
theoretical coefficients of performance for systems undergoing refrigeration and heat pump
cycles while communicating thermally with two reservoirs at different temperatures are
evaluated in Sec. 5.5 with reference to the following corollaries of the second law:

 The coefficient of performance of an irreversible refrigeration cycle is always less than
   the coefficient of performance of a reversible refrigeration cycle when each operates
   between the same two thermal reservoirs.

 All reversible refrigeration cycles operating between the same two thermal reservoirs
   have the same coefficient of performance.

By replacing the term refrigeration with heat pump, we obtain counterpart corollaries for
heat pump cycles.

   The first of these corollaries agrees with expectations stemming from the discussion of the
second law thus far. To explore this, consider Fig. 5.8, which shows a reversible refrigeration
cycle R and an irreversible refrigeration cycle I operating between the same two reservoirs.
Each cycle removes the same energy QC from the cold reservoir. The net work input required
to operate R is WR, while the net work input for I is WI. Each cycle discharges energy by heat
transfer to the hot reservoir equal to the sum of QC and the net work input. The directions of
the energy transfers are shown by arrows on Fig. 5.8. The presence of irreversibilities during
the operation of a refrigeration cycle is expected to exact a penalty. If two refrigerators working

    QH = QC + WR QH = QC + WI
                Hot reservoir

WR  R                   I      WI

                                    Figure 5.8 Sketch for demonstrating that a

                                   reversible refrigeration cycle R has a greater co-

    QC  Cold reservoir  QC         efficient of performance than an irreversible cy-
                                   cle I when they operate between the same two

                                   reservoirs.
190 Chapter 5 The Second Law of Thermodynamics

                                between the same reservoirs each receive an identical energy transfer from the cold reservoir,
                                QC, and one executes a reversible cycle while the other executes an irreversible cycle, we ex-
                                pect the irreversible cycle to require a greater net work input and thus to have a smaller
                                coefficient of performance. By a simple extension it follows that all reversible refrigeration
                                cycles operating between the same two reservoirs have the same coefficient of performance.
                                Similar arguments apply to the counterpart heat pump cycle statements.

                                    These corollaries can be demonstrated formally using the Kelvin­Planck statement of the
                                second law and a procedure similar to that employed for the Carnot corollaries. The details
                                are left as an exercise.

              5.4 Defining the Kelvin Temperature Scale
              The results of Sec. 5.3 establish theoretical upper limits on the performance of power,
              refrigeration, and heat pump cycles communicating thermally with two reservoirs. Expres-
              sions for the maximum theoretical thermal efficiency of power cycles and the maximum
              theoretical coefficients of performance of refrigeration and heat pump cycles are developed
              in Sec. 5.5 using the Kelvin temperature scale defined in the present section.

                 From the second Carnot corollary we know that all reversible power cycles operating
              between the same two thermal reservoirs have the same thermal efficiency, regardless of the
              nature of the substance making up the system executing the cycle or the series of processes.
              Since the efficiency is independent of these factors, its value can be related only to the
              nature of the reservoirs themselves. Noting that it is the difference in temperature between
              the two reservoirs that provides the impetus for heat transfer between them, and thereby for
              the production of work during the cycle, we reason that the efficiency depends only on the
              temperatures of the two reservoirs.

                 From Eq. 5.2 it also follows that for such reversible power cycles the ratio of the heat
              transfers QCQH depends only on the reservoir temperatures. That is

              a  QC b  rev      c1uC,  uH2               (5.5)
                 QH    cycle

              where H and C denote the temperatures of the reservoirs and the function  is for the present
              unspecified. Note that the words "rev cycle" are added to this expression to emphasize that
              it applies only to systems undergoing reversible cycles while operating between two thermal
              reservoirs.

Kelvin scale  KELVIN SCALE

              Equation 5.5 provides a basis for defining a thermodynamic temperature scale: a scale inde-
              pendent of the properties of any substance. There are alternative choices for the function 
              that lead to this end. The Kelvin scale is obtained by making a particularly simple choice,
              namely,   TCTH, where T is the symbol used to denote temperatures on the Kelvin scale.
              With this, Eq. 5.5 becomes

                 a QC b  TC                              (5.6)
                 QH rev         TH
                       cycle

              Thus, two temperatures on the Kelvin scale are in the same ratio as the values of the heat
              transfers absorbed and rejected, respectively, by a system undergoing a reversible cycle while
              communicating thermally with reservoirs at these temperatures.
                                         5.4 Defining the Kelvin Temperature Scale 191

   If a reversible power cycle were operated in the opposite direction as a refrigeration or
heat pump cycle, the magnitudes of the energy transfers QC and QH would remain the same,
but the energy transfers would be oppositely directed. Accordingly, Eq. 5.6 applies to each
type of cycle considered thus far, provided the system undergoing the cycle operates between
two thermal reservoirs and the cycle is reversible.

   Equation 5.6 gives only a ratio of temperatures. To complete the definition of the Kelvin scale,
it is necessary to proceed as in Sec. 1.6 by assigning the value 273.16 K to the temperature at
the triple point of water. Then, if a reversible cycle is operated between a reservoir at 273.16 K
and another reservoir at temperature T, the two temperatures are related according to

                 Q                       (5.7)
T  273.16 a b

                Qtp rev
                                  cycle

where Qtp and Q are the heat transfers between the cycle and reservoirs at 273.16 K and tem-
perature T, respectively. In the present case, the heat transfer Q plays the role of the ther-
mometric property. However, since the performance of a reversible cycle is independent of
the makeup of the system executing the cycle, the definition of temperature given by Eq. 5.7
depends in no way on the properties of any substance or class of substances.

   In Sec. 1.6 we noted that the Kelvin scale has a zero of 0 K, and lower temperatures than
this are not defined. Let us take up these points by considering a reversible power cycle op-
erating between reservoirs at 273.16 K and a lower temperature T. Referring to Eq. 5.7, we
know that the energy rejected from the cycle by heat transfer Q would not be negative, so T
must be nonnegative. Equation 5.7 also shows that the smaller the value of Q, the lower the
value of T, and conversely. Accordingly, as Q approaches zero the temperature T approaches
zero. It can be concluded that a temperature of zero on the Kelvin scale is the lowest con-
ceivable temperature. This temperature is called the absolute zero, and the Kelvin scale is
called an absolute temperature scale.

INTERNATIONAL TEMPERATURE SCALE

When numerical values of the thermodynamic temperature are to be determined, it is not
possible to use reversible cycles, for these exist only in our imaginations. However, temper-
atures evaluated using the constant-volume gas thermometer introduced in Sec. 1.6 are iden-
tical to those of the Kelvin scale in the range of temperatures where the gas thermometer can
be used. Other empirical approaches can be employed for temperatures above and below the
range accessible to gas thermometry. The Kelvin scale provides a continuous definition of
temperature valid over all ranges and provides an essential connection between the several
empirical measures of temperature.

   To provide a standard for temperature measurement taking into account both theoretical
and practical considerations, the International Temperature Scale (ITS) was adopted in 1927.
This scale has been refined and extended in several revisions, most recently in 1990. The
International Temperature Scale of 1990 (ITS-90) is defined in such a way that the temper-
ature measured on it conforms with the thermodynamic temperature, the unit of which is the
kelvin, to within the limits of accuracy of measurement obtainable in 1990. The ITS-90 is
based on the assigned values of temperature of a number of reproducible fixed points
(Table 5.1). Interpolation between the fixed-point temperatures is accomplished by formulas
that give the relation between readings of standard instruments and values of the ITS. In the
range from 0.65 to 5.0 K, ITS-90 is defined by equations giving the temperature as functions
of the vapor pressures of particular helium isotopes. The range from 3.0 to 24.5561 K is
based on measurements using a helium constant-volume gas thermometer. In the range from
13.8033 to 1234.93 K, ITS-90 is defined by means of certain platinum resistance ther-
mometers. Above 1234.9 K the temperature is defined using Planck's equation for blackbody
radiation and measurements of the intensity of visible-spectrum radiation.
192 Chapter 5 The Second Law of Thermodynamics

TABLE 5.1 Defining Fixed Points of the International
Temperature Scale of 1990

                    T (K)     Substancea              Stateb

3 to 5                        He                Vapor pressure point

                    13.8033   e-H2              Triple point

                    17        e-H2              Vapor pressure point

                    20.3      e-H2              Vapor pressure point

                    24.5561   Ne                Triple point

                    54.3584   O2                Triple point
                                                Triple point
                    83.8058   Ar

                    234.3156  Hg                Triple point

                    273.16    H2O               Triple point

                    302.9146  Ga                Melting point

                    429.7485  In                Freezing point

                    505.078   Sn                Freezing point

                    692.677   Zn                Freezing point

                    933.473   Al                Freezing point

1234.93                       Ag                Freezing point

1337.33                       Au                Freezing point

1357.77                       Cu                Freezing point

aHe denotes 3He or 4He; e-H2 is hydrogen at the equilibrium
concentration of the ortho- and para-molecular forms.

bTriple point: temperature at which the solid, liquid, and vapor
phases are in equilibrium. Melting point, freezing point: temperature,
at a pressure of 101.325 kPa, at which the solid and liquid phases are
in equilibrium.

Source: H. Preston-Thomas, "The International Temperature Scale of
1990 (ITS-90)," Metrologia 27, 3­10 (1990).

5.5 Maximum Performance
         Measures for Cycles Operating
         Between Two Reservoirs

The discussion of Sec. 5.3 continues in this section with the development of expressions for
the maximum thermal efficiency of power cycles and the maximum coefficients of perform-
ance of refrigeration and heat pump cycles in terms of reservoir temperatures evaluated on
the Kelvin scale. These expressions can be used as standards of comparison for actual power,
refrigeration, and heat pump cycles.

 5.5.1 Power Cycles

The use of Eq. 5.6 in Eq. 5.2 results in an expression for the thermal efficiency of a system
undergoing a reversible power cycle while operating between thermal reservoirs at temper-
atures TH and TC. That is

Carnot efficiency                               hmax    1       TC      (5.8)
                                                                TH

which is known as the Carnot efficiency.
5.5 Maximum Performance Measures for Cycles Operating Between Two Reservoirs 193

   Recalling the two Carnot corollaries, it should be evident that the efficiency given by            1.0  b
Eq. 5.8 is the thermal efficiency of all reversible power cycles operating between two reser-
voirs at temperatures TH and TC, and the maximum efficiency any power cycle can have while       max  0.5
operating between the two reservoirs. By inspection, the value of the Carnot efficiency in-
creases as TH increases and /or TC decreases.                                                            a
                                                                                                      0
   Equation 5.8 is presented graphically in Fig. 5.9. The temperature TC used in constructing
the figure is 298 K in recognition that actual power cycles ultimately discharge energy by heat          298 1000 2000 3000
transfer at about the temperature of the local atmosphere or cooling water drawn from a nearby
river or lake. Note that the possibility of increasing the thermal efficiency by reducing TC                        TH (K)
below that of the environment is not practical, for maintaining TC lower than the ambient tem-    Figure 5.9 Carnot
perature would require a refrigerator that would have to be supplied work to operate.            efficiency versus TH, for
                                                                                                 TC  298 K.
   Figure 5.9 shows that the thermal efficiency increases with TH. Referring to segment a­b
of the curve, where TH and  are relatively low, we can see that  increases rapidly as TH
increases, showing that in this range even a small increase in TH can have a large effect on
efficiency. Though these conclusions, drawn as they are from Fig. 5.9, apply strictly only to
systems undergoing reversible cycles, they are qualitatively correct for actual power cycles.
The thermal efficiencies of actual cycles are observed to increase as the average tempera-
ture at which energy is added by heat transfer increases and/or the average temperature at
which energy is discharged by heat transfer is reduced. However, maximizing the thermal
efficiency of a power cycle may not be the only objective. In practice, other considerations
such as cost may be overriding.

COMMENT. Conventional power-producing cycles have thermal efficiencies ranging up to
about 40%. This value may seem low, but the comparison should be made with an appropri-
ate limiting value and not 100%.  for example. . . consider a system executing a power
cycle for which the average temperature of heat addition is 745 K and the average tempera-
ture at which heat is discharged is 298 K. For a reversible cycle receiving and discharging en-
ergy by heat transfer at these temperatures, the thermal efficiency given by Eq. 5.8 is 60%.
When compared to this value, an actual thermal efficiency of 40% does not appear to be so
low. The cycle would be operating at two-thirds of the theoretical maximum. 

A more complete discussion of power cycles is provided in Chaps. 8 and 9.

 5.5.2 Refrigeration and Heat Pump Cycles

Equation 5.6 is also applicable to reversible refrigeration and heat pump cycles operating
between two thermal reservoirs, but for these QC represents the heat added to the cycle from
the cold reservoir at temperature TC on the Kelvin scale and QH is the heat discharged to the
hot reservoir at temperature TH. Introducing Eq. 5.6 in Eq. 5.3 results in the following
expression for the coefficient of performance of any system undergoing a reversible
refrigeration cycle while operating between the two reservoirs

bmax    TH  TC  TC                                                         (5.9) 
            

Similarly, substituting Eq. 5.6 into Eq. 5.4 gives the following expression for the coefficient
of performance of any system undergoing a reversible heat pump cycle while operating
between the two reservoirs

gmax       TH   TC                                                         (5.10) 
        TH 
194 Chapter 5 The Second Law of Thermodynamics

                                The development of Eqs. 5.9 and 5.10 is left as an exercise. Note that the temperatures used
                                to evaluate max and max must be absolute temperatures on the Kelvin or Rankine scale.

                                    From the discussion of Sec. 5.3.3, it follows that Eqs. 5.9 and 5.10 are the maximum
                                coefficients of performance that any refrigeration and heat pump cycles can have while operating
                                between reservoirs at temperatures TH and TC. As for the case of the Carnot efficiency, these
                                expressions can be used as standards of comparison for actual refrigerators and heat pumps. A
                                more complete discussion of refrigeration and heat pump cycles is provided in Chap. 10.

                                 5.5.3 Power Cycle, Refrigeration and Heat Pump Applications

                                In this section, three examples are provided that illustrate the use of the second law corollaries
                                of Secs. 5.3.2 and 5.3.3 together with Eqs. 5.8, 5.9, and 5.10, as appropriate.

                                    The first example uses Eq. 5.8 to evaluate an inventor's claim.
                                    In the next example, we evaluate the coefficient of performance of a refrigerator and com-
                                pare it with the maximum theoretical value.

  E X A M P L E 5 . 1 Evaluating a Power Cycle Performance Claim

  An inventor claims to have developed a power cycle capable of delivering a net work output of 410 kJ for an energy input by
  heat transfer of 1000 kJ. The system undergoing the cycle receives the heat transfer from hot gases at a temperature of 500 K
  and discharges energy by heat transfer to the atmosphere at 300 K. Evaluate this claim.

  SOLUTION
  Known: A system operates in a cycle and produces a net amount of work while receiving and discharging energy by heat
  transfer at fixed temperatures.
  Find: Evaluate the claim that the cycle can develop 410 kJ of work for an energy input by heat of 1000 kJ.
  Schematic and Given Data:

  Qin = 1000 kJ               Assumptions:
           500 K              1. The system is shown on the accompanying figure.
                              2. The hot gases and the atmosphere play the roles of hot and cold reservoirs, respectively.
  Power           W = 410 kJ
  cycle                        Figure E5.1

         300 K
  Qout

  Analysis: Inserting the values supplied by the inventor into Eq. 5.2, the cycle thermal efficiency is

                                      h  410 kJ  0.41 141%2
                                            1000 kJ

  The maximum thermal efficiency any power cycle can have while operating between reservoirs at TH  500 K and TC 
  300 K is given by Eq. 5.8.

                              hmax    1    TC    1    300      K    0.40  1 40 % 2
                                           TH         500      K

  Since the thermal efficiency of the actual cycle exceeds the maximum theoretical value, the claim cannot be valid.

   The temperatures used in evaluating max must be in K or R.
                                           5.5 Maximum Performance Measures for Cycles Operating Between Two Reservoirs 195

  E X A M P L E 5 . 2 Evaluating Refrigerator Performance

  By steadily circulating a refrigerant at low temperature through passages in the walls of the freezer compartment, a refrigerator
  maintains the freezer compartment at 5C when the air surrounding the refrigerator is at 22C. The rate of heat transfer from
  the freezer compartment to the refrigerant is 8000 kJ/h and the power input required to operate the refrigerator is 3200 kJ/h.
  Determine the coefficient of performance of the refrigerator and compare with the coefficient of performance of a reversible
  refrigeration cycle operating between reservoirs at the same two temperatures.

  SOLUTION
  Known: A refrigerator maintains a freezer compartment at a specified temperature. The rate of heat transfer from the
  refrigerated space, the power input to operate the refrigerator, and the ambient temperature are known.
  Find: Determine the coefficient of performance and compare with that of a reversible refrigerator operating between reser-
  voirs at the same two temperatures.
  Schematic and Given Data:

  Surroundings at 22°C (295 K)

                       ·
                      QH

                                     ·
                                    Wcycle
                                    = 3200 kJ/h

                                                   Assumptions:

                                                   1. The system shown on the accompanying figure is at steady state.
                                                   2. The freezer compartment and the surrounding air play the roles of cold
                                                   and hot reservoirs, respectively.

                Q· C = 8000 kJ/h  System
                                  boundary
             Freezer compartment
             at ­5°C (268 K)                         Figure E5.2

  Analysis:  Inserting the given operating data into Eq. 5.3, the coefficient of performance of the refrigerator is

                                                       #

                                                 b     QC       8000 kJ/h  2.5
                                                       #

                                                       Wcycle 3200 kJ/h

      Substituting values into Eq. 5.9 gives the coefficient of performance of a reversible refrigeration cycle operating between
  reservoirs at TC  268 K and TH  295 K

                                  bmax             TH  TC  TC    295  268 K   K    9.9
                                                                      K  268

   The difference between the actual and maximum coefficients of performance suggests that there may be some potential

      for improving the thermodynamic performance. This objective should be approached judiciously, however, for improved

      performance may require increases in size, complexity, and cost.

   In Example 5.3, we determine the minimum theoretical work input and cost for one day
of operation of an electric heat pump.
196 Chapter 5 The Second Law of Thermodynamics

    E X A M P L E 5 . 3 Evaluating Heat Pump Performance

    A dwelling requires 5  105 kJ per day to maintain its temperature at 22C when the outside temperature is 10C. (a) If an elec-
    tric heat pump is used to supply this energy, determine the minimum theoretical work input for one day of operation, in kJ.

    SOLUTION
    Known: A heat pump maintains a dwelling at a specified temperature. The energy supplied to the dwelling, the ambient
    temperature, and the unit cost of electricity are known.
    Find: Determine the minimum theoretical work required by the heat pump and the corresponding electricity cost.
    Schematic and Given Data:

              Heat pump             Dwelling               Assumptions:
                                    at 22°C                1. The system is shown on the accompanying figure.
  Wcycle                            (295°K)                2. The dwelling and the outside air play the roles of hot and cold
                              QH                           reservoirs, respectively.

                        QC                                  Figure E5.3
             at 10°C (283 K)

  Analysis:

  (a) Using Eq. 5.4, the work for any heat pump cycle can be expressed as Wcycle  QH. The coefficient of performance 
  of an actual heat pump is less than, or equal to, the coefficient of performance max of a reversible heat pump cycle when each
  operates between the same two thermal reservoirs:   max. Accordingly, for a given value of QH, and using Eq. 5.10 to
  evaluate max, we get

                                                Wcycle  QH
                                                           gmax

                                                             a1    TC  b  QH
                                                                   TH

  Inserting values

                              Wcycle    a1      283°K b  15      105 kJ2    2.03    104 kJ/day
                                                295°K

  The minimum theoretical work input is 2.03  104 kJ/day.

   Note that the reservoir temperatures TC and TH must be expressed here in K.

   Because of irreversibilities, an actual heat pump must be supplied more work than the minimum to provide the same heat-

      ing effect. The actual daily cost could be substantially greater than the minimum theoretical cost.

Carnot cycle                  5.6 Carnot Cycle

                              The Carnot cycle introduced in this section provides a specific example of a reversible power
                              cycle operating between two thermal reservoirs. Two other examples are provided in Chap. 9:
                              the Ericsson and Stirling cycles. Each of these cycles exhibits the Carnot efficiency given by
                              Eq. 5.8.

                                  In a Carnot cycle, the system executing the cycle undergoes a series of four internally
                              reversible processes: two adiabatic processes alternated with two isothermal processes.
                                                                                                  5.6 Carnot Cycle 197

Figure 5.10 shows the p­v diagram of a Carnot power cycle in which the system is a gas            p
in a piston­cylinder assembly. Figure 5.11 provides details of how the cycle is executed.                  2
The piston and cylinder walls are nonconducting. The heat transfers are in the directions of
the arrows. Also note that there are two reservoirs at temperatures TH and TC, respec-            TC          3
tively, and an insulating stand. Initially, the piston­cylinder assembly is on the insulating          1          TH
stand and the system is at state 1, where the temperature is TC. The four processes of the
cycle are                                                                                                                       4

Process 1­2: The gas is compressed adiabatically to state 2, where the temperature is TH.                                           v
                                                                                                   Figure 5.10 p­v di-
Process 2­3: The assembly is placed in contact with the reservoir at TH. The gas expands          agram for a Carnot gas
      isothermally while receiving energy QH from the hot reservoir by heat transfer.             power cycle.

Process 3­4: The assembly is again placed on the insulating stand and the gas is allowed
      to continue to expand adiabatically until the temperature drops to TC.

Process 4­1: The assembly is placed in contact with the reservoir at TC. The gas is com-
      pressed isothermally to its initial state while it discharges energy QC to the cold reser-
      voir by heat transfer.

For the heat transfer during Process 2­3 to be reversible, the difference between the gas tem-
perature and the temperature of the hot reservoir must be vanishingly small. Since the reser-
voir temperature remains constant, this implies that the temperature of the gas also remains
constant during Process 2­3. The same can be concluded for Process 4­1.

   For each of the four internally reversible processes of the Carnot cycle, the work can be
represented as an area on Fig. 5.10. The area under the adiabatic process line 1­2 represents
the work done per unit of mass to compress the gas in this process. The areas under process
lines 2­3 and 3­4 represent the work done per unit of mass by the gas as it expands in these
processes. The area under process line 4­1 is the work done per unit of mass to compress
the gas in this process. The enclosed area on the p­v diagram, shown shaded, is the net work
developed by the cycle per unit of mass.

   The Carnot cycle is not limited to processes of a closed system taking place in a
piston­cylinder assembly. Figure 5.12 shows the schematic and accompanying p­v diagram
of a Carnot cycle executed by water steadily circulating through a series of four intercon-
nected components that has features in common with the simple vapor power plant shown
in Fig. 4.14. As the water flows through the boiler, a change of phase from liquid to vapor
at constant temperature TH occurs as a result of heat transfer from the hot reservoir. Since

             Isothermal         Adiabatic        Isothermal
             expansion          expansion       compression

 Adiabatic
compression

Gas

Insulating              QH      Insulating                  QC
  stand      Hot reservoir, TH    stand         Cold reservoir, TC

                                      Boundary

Process 1­2  Process 2­3        Process 3­4     Process 4­1

 Figure 5.11 Carnot power cycle executed by a gas in a piston­cylinder
assembly.
198 Chapter 5 The Second Law of Thermodynamics

                                              Hot reservoir, TH
                                                         QH

                                           4  Boiler             1

                                                                                p TH

                                     Work     Pump       Turbine                TC       1

                                                                    Work        4

                                           3  Condenser          2                             TH
                                                                                                         TC
                                                                        QC            3     2                v
                                                            Cold reservoir, TC

                                      Figure 5.12 Carnot vapor power cycle.

p TH                                 temperature remains constant, pressure also remains constant during the phase change. The
        4                            steam exiting the boiler expands adiabatically through the turbine and work is developed. In
                                     this process the temperature decreases to the temperature of the cold reservoir, TC, and there
                                     is an accompanying decrease in pressure. As the steam passes through the condenser, a heat
                                     transfer to the cold reservoir occurs and some of the vapor condenses at constant temperature
                                     TC. Since temperature remains constant, pressure also remains constant as the water passes
                                     through the condenser. The fourth component is a pump, or compressor, that receives a two-
                                     phase liquid­vapor mixture from the condenser and returns it adiabatically to the state at the
                                     boiler entrance. During this process, which requires a work input to increase the pressure,
                                     the temperature increases from TC to TH.

                                        Carnot cycles also can be devised that are composed of processes in which a capacitor
                                     is charged and discharged, a paramagnetic substance is magnetized and demagnetized, and
                                     so on. However, regardless of the type of device or the working substance used, the Carnot
                                     cycle always has the same four internally reversible processes: two adiabatic processes al-
                                     ternated with two isothermal processes. Moreover, the thermal efficiency is always given
                                     by Eq. 5.8 in terms of the temperatures of the two reservoirs evaluated on the Kelvin or
                                     Rankine scale.

                                        If a Carnot power cycle is operated in the opposite direction, the magnitudes of all energy
                                     transfers remain the same but the energy transfers are oppositely directed. Such a cycle may
                                     be regarded as a reversible refrigeration or heat pump cycle, for which the coefficients of
                                     performance are given by Eqs. 5.9 and 5.10, respectively. A Carnot refrigeration or heat pump
                                     cycle executed by a gas in a piston­cylinder assembly is shown in Fig. 5.13. The cycle consists
                                     of the following four processes in series:

TC            3                      Process 1­2: The gas expands isothermally at TC while receiving energy QC from the cold
                                           reservoir by heat transfer.
           1
                                     Process 2­3: The gas is compressed adiabatically until its temperature is TH.
                           2         Process 3­4: The gas is compressed isothermally at TH while it discharges energy QH to
                                  v
                                           the hot reservoir by heat transfer.
 Figure 5.13 p­v di-
agram for a Carnot gas               Process 4­1: The gas expands adiabatically until its temperature decreases to TC.
refrigeration or heat
pump cycle.                          It will be recalled that a refrigeration or heat pump effect can be accomplished in a cycle
                                     only if a net work input is supplied to the system executing the cycle. In the case of the cycle
                                     shown in Fig. 5.13, the shaded area represents the net work input per unit of mass.
                                                                       Exercises: Things Engineers Think About 199

Chapter Summary and Study Guide

In this chapter, we motivate the need for and usefulness of               The following checklist provides a study guide for this
the second law of thermodynamics, and provide the basis                chapter. When your study of the text and end-of-chapter
for subsequent applications involving the second law in                exercises has been completed you should be able to
Chaps. 6 and 7. Two equivalent statements of the second
law, the Clausius and Kelvin­Planck statements, are intro-              write out the meanings of the terms listed in the margins
duced together with several corollaries that establish the                throughout the chapter and understand each of the
best theoretical performance for systems undergoing cycles                related concepts. The subset of key concepts listed below
while interacting with thermal reservoirs. The irreversibil-              is particularly important in subsequent chapters.
ity concept is introduced and the related notions of
irreversible, reversible, and internally reversible processes           give the Kelvin­Planck statement of the second law,
are discussed. The Kelvin temperature scale is defined                    correctly interpreting the "less than" and "equal to" signs
and used to obtain expressions for the maximum perform-                   in Eq. 5.1.
ance measures of power, refrigeration, and heat pump cy-
cles operating between two thermal reservoirs. Finally, the             list several important irreversibilities.
Carnot cycle is introduced to provide a specific example
of a reversible cycle operating between two thermal                     apply the corollaries of Secs. 5.3.2 and 5.3.3 together
reservoirs.                                                               with Eqs. 5.8, 5.9, and 5.10 to assess the performance of
                                                                          power cycles and refrigeration and heat pump cycles.

                                                                        describe the Carnot cycle.

Key Engineering Concepts

Kelvin­planck        irreversibilities p. 180                          internally reversible      Kelvin scale p. 190
   statement p. 178  internal and external                                process p. 184          Carnot efficiency p. 192

irreversible            irreversibilities p. 181                       Carnot corollaries p. 186
   process p. 180

Exercises: Things Engineers Think About

1. Explain how work might be developed when (a) Ti is less than        Would you expect the power input to the compressor to be greater
T0 in Fig. 5.1a, (b) pi is less than p0 in Fig. 5.1b.                  in an internally reversible compression or an actual compression?
2. A system consists of an ice cube in a cup of tap water. The
ice cube melts and eventually equilibrium is attained. How might       9. If a window air conditioner were placed on a table in a room
work be developed as the ice and water come to equilibrium?            and operated, would the room temperature increase, decrease, or
                                                                       remain the same?
3. Describe a process that would satisfy the conservation of
energy principle, but does not actually occur in nature.               10. To increase the thermal efficiency of a reversible power
                                                                       cycle operating between thermal reservoirs at temperatures TH
4. Referring to Fig. 2.3, identify internal irreversibilities associ-  and TC, would it be better to increase TH or decrease TC by equal
ated with system A. Repeat for system B.                               amounts?

5. What are some of the principal irreversibilities present during     11. Electric power plants typically reject energy by heat transfer
operation of (a) an automobile engine, (b) a household refriger-       to a body of water or the atmosphere. Would it be advisable to
ator, (c) a gas-fired water heater, (d) an electric water heater?      reject heat instead to large blocks of ice maintained by a refrig-
                                                                       eration system?
6. For the gearbox of Example 2.4, list the principal irre-
versibilities and classify them as internal or external.               12. Referring to Eqs. 5.9 and 5.10, how might the coefficients
                                                                       of performance of refrigeration cycles and heat pumps be
7. Steam at a given state enters a turbine operating at steady state   increased?
and expands adiabatically to a specified lower pressure. Would
you expect the power output to be greater in an internally re-         13. Is it possible for the coefficient of performance of a refrig-
versible expansion or an actual expansion?                             eration cycle to be less than one? To be greater than one? Answer
                                                                       the same questions for a heat pump cycle.
8. Air at a given state enters a compressor operating at steady state
and is compressed adiabatically to a specified higher pressure.
200 Chapter 5 The Second Law of Thermodynamics

Problems: Developing Engineering Skills

Exploring the Second Law                                                      more energy QC to the cold reservoir than cycle R. Dis-
                                                                              cuss the implications of this for actual power cycles.
5.1 A heat pump receives energy by heat transfer from the out-           (b) If each cycle develops the same net work, show that cycle
   side air at 0C and discharges energy by heat transfer to a                 I necessarily receives more energy QH from the hot
   dwelling at 20C. Is this in violation of the Clausius statement            reservoir than cycle R. Discuss the implications of this
   of the second law of thermodynamics? Explain.                              for actual power cycles.

5.2 Air as an ideal gas expands isothermally at 20C from a            5.11 Provide the details left to the reader in the demonstration
   volume of 1 m3 to 2 m3. During this process there is heat             of the second Carnot corollary given in Sec. 5.3.2.
   transfer to the air from the surrounding atmosphere, mod-
   eled as a thermal reservoir, and the air does work. Evaluate       5.12 Using the Kelvin­Planck statement of the second law of
   the work and heat transfer for the process, in kJ/kg. Is this         thermodynamics, demonstrate the following corollaries:
   process in violation of the second law of thermodynamics?
   Explain.                                                              (a) The coefficient of performance of an irreversible refriger-
                                                                              ation cycle is always less than the coefficient of perform-
5.3 Complete the demonstration of the equivalence of the Clau-                ance of a reversible refrigeration cycle when both exchange
   sius and Kelvin­Planck statements of the second law given in               energy by heat transfer with the same two reservoirs.
   Sec. 5.1 by showing that a violation of the Kelvin­Planck
   statement implies a violation of the Clausius statement.              (b) All reversible refrigeration cycles operating between the
                                                                              same two reservoirs have the same coefficient of
5.4 An inventor claims to have developed a device that under-                 performance.
   goes a thermodynamic cycle while communicating thermally
   with two reservoirs. The system receives energy QC from the           (c) The coefficient of performance of an irreversible heat pump
   cold reservoir and discharges energy QH to the hot reservoir              cycle is always less than the coefficient of performance of
   while delivering a net amount of work to its surroundings.                a reversible heat pump cycle when both exchange energy
   There are no other energy transfers between the device and its            by heat transfer with the same two reservoirs.
   surroundings. Using the second law of thermodynamics, eval-
   uate the inventor's claim.                                            (d) All reversible heat pump cycles operating between the
                                                                              same two reservoirs have the same coefficient of per-
5.5 A hot thermal reservoir is separated from a cold thermal                  formance.
   reservoir by a cylindrical rod insulated on its lateral surface.
   Energy transfer by conduction between the two reservoirs takes     5.13 Before introducing the temperature scale now known as
   place through the rod, which remains at steady state. Using the       the Kelvin scale, Kelvin suggested a logarithmic scale in which
   Kelvin­Planck statement of the second law, demonstrate that           the function  of Eq. 5.5 takes the form
   such a process is irreversible.
                                                                                           c  exp uCexp uH
5.6 Methane gas within a piston­cylinder assembly is com-
   pressed in a quasiequilibrium process. Is this process internally     where H and C denote, respectively, the temperatures of the
   reversible? Is this process reversible?                               hot and cold reservoirs on this scale.

5.7 Water within a piston­cylinder assembly cools isothermally           (a) Show that the relation between the Kelvin temperature T
   at 120C from saturated vapor to saturated liquid while inter-              and the temperature  on the logarithmic scale is
   acting thermally with its surroundings at 20C. Is the process
   internally reversible? Is it reversible? Discuss.                                                u  ln T  C

5.8 Complete the discussion of the Kelvin­Planck statement of                 where C is a constant.
   the second law in Sec. 5.3.1 by showing that if a system un-          (b) On the Kelvin scale, temperatures vary from 0 to .
   dergoes a thermodynamic cycle reversibly while communicat-
   ing thermally with a single reservoir, the equality in Eq. 5.1             Determine the range of temperature values on the loga-
   applies.                                                                   rithmic scale.
                                                                         (c) Obtain an expression for the thermal efficiency of any sys-
5.9 A power cycle I and a reversible power cycle R operate                   tem undergoing a reversible power cycle while operating
   between the same two reservoirs, as shown in Fig. 5.6. Cycle I            between reservoirs at temperatures H and C on the loga-
   has a thermal efficiency equal to two-thirds of that for cycle R.         rithmic scale.
   Using the Kelvin-Planck statement of the second law, prove
   that cycle I must be irreversible.                                 5.14 Demonstrate that the gas temperature scale (Sec. 1.6) is
                                                                         identical to the Kelvin temperature scale.
5.10 A reversible power cycle R and an irreversible power
   cycle I operate between the same two reservoirs.                   5.15 To increase the thermal efficiency of a reversible power
                                                                         cycle operating between reservoirs at TH and TC, would you
   (a) If each cycle receives the same amount of energy QH from          increase TH while keeping TC constant, or decrease TC while
        the hot reservoir, show that cycle I necessarily discharges      keeping TH constant? Are there any natural limits on the in-
                                                                         crease in thermal efficiency that might be achieved by such
                                                                         means?
                                                                            Problems: Developing Engineering Skills 201

5.16 Two reversible power cycles are arranged in series. The             (c) Letting T Hż  TC  T0, plot QHż QH versus THT0 for
   first cycle receives energy by heat transfer from a reservoir at          T żC T0  0.85, 0.9, and 0.95, and versus T żC T0 for TH T0
   temperature TH and rejects energy to a reservoir at an inter-
   mediate temperature T. The second cycle receives the energy                 2, 3, and 4.
   rejected by the first cycle from the reservoir at temperature T
   and rejects energy to a reservoir at temperature TC lower than      5.22 Figure P5.22 shows a system consisting of a power cycle
   T. Derive an expression for the intermediate temperature T in
   terms of TH and TC when                                                d#riving a heat pump. At steady state, the power cycle receives
                                                                          Qs by hea#t transfer at Ts from the high-temperature source an#d
   (a) the net work of the two power cycles is equal.                     delivers Q1 to a dwelling at Td. The h# eat pump receives Q0
   (b) the thermal efficiencies of the two power cycles are equal.        from the outdoors at T0, and delivers Q2 to the dwelling.

5.17 If the thermal efficiency of a reversible power cycle oper-                          ·       Dwelling   ·
   ating between two reservoirs is denoted by max, develop an ex-                        Q1                 Q2
   pression in terms of max for the coefficient of performance of                                 at Td

   (a) a reversible refrigeration cycle operating between the same                    ·                    Heat pump
        two reservoirs.                                                               Qs
                                                                       Air                                          ·
   (b) a reversible heat pump operating between the same two                                                       Q0
        reservoirs.                                                               Ts  Power cycle        Outdoors at T0

5.18 The data listed below are claimed for a power cycle op-                          Driveshaft
   erating between reservoirs at 527C and 27C. For each case,
   determine if any principles of thermodynamics would be                   Fuel
   violated.
                                                                        Figure P5.22
   (a) QH  700 kJ, Wcycle  400 kJ, QC  300 kJ.
   (b) QH  640 kJ, Wcycle  400 kJ, QC  240 kJ.                            (a) Obtain an expression for the ma#ximum# the#oretical value
   (c) QH  640 kJ, Wcycle  400 kJ, QC  200 kJ.
                                                                             of the performance parameter 1Q1  Q22Qs in terms of
5.19 A refrigeration cycle operating between two reservoirs re-
   ceives energy QC from a cold reservoir at TC  280 K and                     the temperature ratios TsTd and T0Td.
   rejects energy QH to a hot reservoir at TH  320 K. For each            (b) Plot the result of part (a) versus TsTd ranging from 2 to
   of the following cases determine whether the cycle operates
   reversibly, irreversibly, or is impossible:                                 4 for T0Td  0.85, 0.9, and 0.95.

   (a) QC  1500 kJ, Wcycle  150 kJ.                                    Power Cycle Applications
   (b) QC  1400 kJ, QH  1600 kJ.
   (c) QH  1600 kJ, Wcycle  400 kJ.                                    5.23 A power cycle operates between a reservoir at tempera-
   (d)   5.                                                               ture T and a lower-temperature reservoir at 280 K. At steady
                                                                          state, the cycle develops 40 kW of power while rejecting 1000
5.20 A reversible power cycle receives QH from a hot reservoir            kJ/min of energy by heat transfer to the cold reservoir. Deter-
   at temperature TH and rejects energy by heat transfer to the           mine the minimum theoretical value for T, in K.
   surroundings at temperature T0. The work developed by the
   power cycle is used to drive a refrigeration cycle that removes     5.24 A certain reversible power cycle has the same thermal ef-
   QC from a cold reservoir at temperature TC and discharges              ficiency for hot and cold reservoirs at 1000 and 500 K, re-
   energy by heat transfer to the same surroundings at T0.                spectively, as for hot and cold reservoirs at temperature T and
                                                                          1000 K. Determine T, in K.
   (a) Develop an expression for the ratio QCQH in terms of the
        temperature ratios THT0 and TCT0.                              5.25 A reversible power cycle whose thermal efficiency is 50%
                                                                          operates between a reservoir at 1800 K and a reservoir at a
   (b) Plot QCQH versus THT0 for TCT0  0.85, 0.9, and 0.95,               lower temperature T. Determine T, in K.
        and versus TCT0 for THT0  2, 3, and 4.
                                                                       5.26 An inventor claims to have developed a device that exe-
5.21 A reversible power cycle receives energy QH from a reser-            cutes a power cycle while operating between reservoirs at 800
   voir at temperature TH and rejects QC to a reservoir at tem-           and 350 K that has a thermal efficiency of (a) 56%, (b) 40%.
   perature TC. The work developed by the power cycle is used             Evaluate the claim for each case.
   to drive a reversible heat pump that removes energy QżC from
   a reservoir at temperature T żC and rejects energy QHż to a reser-  5.27 At steady state, a cycle develops a power output of 10 kW
   voir at temperature T Hż .                                             for heat addition at a rate of 10 kJ per cycle of operation from
                                                                          a source at 1500 K. Energy is rejected by heat transfer to cool-
  (a) Develop an expression for the ratio QHż QH in terms of the          ing water at 300 K. Determine the minimum theoretical num-
                                                                          ber of cycles required per minute.
        temperatures of the four reservoirs.
   (b) What must be the relationship of the temperatures TH, TC,       5.28 At steady state, a power cycle having a thermal efficiency of
                                                                          38% generates 100 MW of electricity while discharging energy
      T żC, and T Hż for QHż QH to exceed a value of unity?               by heat transfer to cooling water at an average temperature
202 Chapter 5 The Second Law of Thermodynamics

   of 70F. The average temperature of the steam passing through                5.32 The preliminary design of a space station calls for a power
   the boiler is 900F. Determine                                                  cycle that at steady state receives energy by heat transfer at
   (a) the rate at which energy is discharged to the cooling water,               TH  600 K from a nuclear source and rejects energy to space
                                                                                  by thermal radiation according to Eq. 2.33. For the radiative
        in Btu /h.                                                                surface, the temperature is TC, the emissivity is 0.6, and the
   (b) the minimum theoretical rate at which energy could be dis-                 surface receives no radiation from any source. The thermal ef-
                                                                                  ficiency of the power cycle is one-half that of a reversible
        charged to the cooling water, in Btu/h. Compare with the                  power cycle operating between reservoirs at TH and TC.
        actual rate and discuss.                                                                                            #
5.29 Ocean temperature energy conversion (OTEC) power
   plants generate power by utilizing the naturally occurring de-                (a) For TC  400 K, determine  Wcycle A, the net power de-
   crease with depth of the temperature of ocean water. Near
   Florida, the ocean surface temperature is 27C, while at a depth                     veloped per unit of radiator surface area, in kW/m2, and
   of 700 m the temperature is 7C.                                                     the the# rmal efficiency.
   (a) Determine the maximum thermal efficiency for any power
        cycle operating between these temperatures.                              (b) Plot Wcycle A and the thermal effic# iency versus TC, and de-
   (b) The thermal efficiency of existing OTEC plants is ap-                         termine the maximum value of  Wcycle A.
        proximately 2 percent. Compare this with the result of part
        (a) and comment.                                                          (c) D# etermine the range of temperatures TC, in K, for which
5.30 During January, at a location in Alaska winds at 30C
   can be observed. Several meters below ground the temperature                       Wcycle A is within 2 percent of the maximum value ob-
   remains at 13C, however. An inventor claims to have devised
   a power cycle exploiting this situation that has a thermal                         tained in part (b).
   efficiency of 10%. Discuss this claim.                                         The Stefan-Boltzmann constant is 5.67  108 Wm2  K4.
5.31 Figure P5.31 shows a system for collecting solar radiation
   and utilizing it for the production of electricity by a power cy-           Refrigeration and Heat Pump Cycle Applications
   cle. The solar collector receives solar radiation at the rate of
   0.315 kW per m2 of area and provides energy to a storage unit               5.33 An inventor claims to have developed a refrigeration cy-
   whose temperature remains constant at 220C. The power cycle                    cle that requires a net power input of 1.2 kW to remove
   receives energy by heat transfer from the storage unit, generates              25,000 kJ/h of energy by heat transfer from a reservoir at
   electricity at the rate 0.5 MW, and discharges energy by heat                  30C and discharge energy by heat transfer to a reservoir at
   transfer to the surroundings at 20C. For operation at steady state,            20C. There are no other energy transfers with the surround-
                                                                                  ings. Evaluate this claim.
                          Solar radiation
                                                                               5.34 Determine if a tray of ice cubes could remain frozen when
                                                Solar collector                   placed in a food freezer having a coefficient of performance
                                                                                  of 9 operating in a room where the temperature is 32C (90F).
                                                         Surroundings at 20°C
                                                                               5.35 The refrigerator shown in Fig. P5.35 operates at steady
                                                                                  state with a coefficient of performance of 4.5 and a power in-
                                                                                  put of 0.8 kW. Energy is rejected from the refrigerator to the
                                                                                  surroundings at 20C by heat transfer from metal coils whose
                                                                                  average surface temperature is 28C. Determine

                                                                                  (a) the rate energy is rejected, in kW.
                                                                                  (b) the lowest theoretical temperature inside the refrigerator, in

                                                                                       K.
                                                                                  (c) the maximum theoretical power, in kW, that could be de-

                                                                                      veloped by a power cycle operating between the coils and

               Area                                                            Refrigerator     Surroundings, 20°C
                                                                                = 4.5

               Storage Power cycle  +                                                           Coils, 28°C
               unit at              ­                                                            Q· H

               220°C

 Figure P5.31

(a) determine the minimum theoretical collector area required,                               +  0.8 kW
     in m2.
                                                                                             ­                       Figure P5.35
(b) determine the collector area required, in m2, as a function
     of the thermal efficiency  and the collector efficiency, de-

     fined as the fraction of the incident energy that is stored.
     Plot the collector area versus  for collector efficiencies

     equal to 1.0, 0.75, and 0.5.
                                                                       Problems: Developing Engineering Skills 203

       the surroundings. Would you recommend making use of                energy by heat transfer to the surroundings, which are at 20C.
       this opportunity for developing power?                             Determine the power input to the refrigerator and compare with
                                                                          the power input required by a reversible refrigeration cycle op-
5.36 Determine the minimum theoretical power, in W, re-                   erating between reservoirs at these two temperatures.
   quired at steady state by a refrigeration system to maintain a
   cryogenic sample at 126C in a laboratory at 21C, if energy          5.45 By supplying energy to a dwelling at a rate of 25,000 kJ/h,
   leaks by heat transfer to the sample from its surroundings at a        a heat pump maintains the temperature of the dwelling at 20C
   rate of 900 W.                                                         when the outside air is at 10C. If electricity costs 8 cents
                                                                          per kW # h, determine the minimum theoretical operating cost
5.37 For each kW of power input to an ice maker at steady state,          for each day of operation.
   determine the maximum rate that ice can be produced, in kg/h,
   from liquid water at 0C. Assume that 333 kJ/kg of energy            Carnot Cycle Applications
   must be removed by heat transfer to freeze water at 0C, and
   that the surroundings are at 20C.                                   5.46 Two kilograms of water execute a Carnot power cycle.
                                                                          During the isothermal expansion, the water is heated until it is
5.38 At steady state, a refrigeration cycle removes 18,000 kJ/h           a saturated vapor from an initial state where the pressure is 40
   of energy by heat transfer from a space maintained at 40C              bar and the quality is 15%. The vapor then expands adiabati-
   and discharges energy by heat transfer to surroundings at 20C.         cally to a pressure of 1.5 bar while doing 491.5 kJ/kg of work.
   If the coefficient of performance of the cycle is 25 percent of
   that of a reversible refrigeration cycle operating between ther-       (a) Sketch the cycle on p­v coordinates.
   mal reservoirs at these two temperatures, determine the power          (b) Evaluate the heat and work for each process, in kJ.
   input to the cycle, in kW.                                             (c) Evaluate the thermal efficiency.

5.39 A refrigeration cycle having a coefficient of performance         5.47 One kilogram of air as an ideal gas executes a Carnot
   of 3 maintains a computer laboratory at 18C on a day when              power cycle having a thermal efficiency of 60%. The heat trans-
   the outside temperature is 30C. The thermal load at steady             fer to the air during the isothermal expansion is 40 kJ. At the
   state consists of energy entering through the walls and win-           end of the isothermal expansion, the pressure is 5.6 bar and
   dows at a rate of 30,000 kJ/h and from the occupants, com-             the volume is 0.3 m3. Determine
   puters, and lighting at a rate of 6000 kJ/h. Determine the power
   required by this cycle and compare with the minimum theo-              (a) the maximum and minimum temperatures for the cycle, in
   retical power required for any refrigeration cycle operating                K.
   under these conditions, each in kW.
                                                                          (b) the pressure and volume at the beginning of the isother-
5.40 A heat pump operating at steady state is driven by a 1-kW                 mal expansion in bar and m3, respectively.
   electric motor and provides heating for a building whose inte-
   rior is to be kept at 20C. On a day when the outside temper-           (c) the work and heat transfer for each of the four processes,
   ature is 0C and energy is lost through the walls and roof at a              in kJ.
   rate of 60,000 kJ/h, would the heat pump suffice?
                                                                          (d) Sketch the cycle on p­v coordinates.
5.41 A heat pump maintains a dwelling at 20C when the out-
   side temperature is 0C. The heat transfer rate through the walls    5.48 The pressure­volume diagram of a Carnot power cycle ex-
   and roof is 3000 kJ/h per degree temperature difference be-            ecuted by an ideal gas with constant specific heat ratio k is
   tween the inside and outside. Determine the minimum theo-              shown in Fig. P5.48. Demonstrate that
   retical power required to drive the heat pump, in kW.
                                                                          (a) V4V2  V1V3.
5.42 A building for which the heat transfer rate through the              (b) T2T3  ( p2p3)(k­1)k.
   walls and roof is 400 W per degree temperature difference              (c) T2T3  (V3V2)k­1.
   between the inside and outside is to be maintained at 20C.
   For a day when the outside temperature is 4C, determine the         p
   power required at steady state, kW, to heat the building using
   electrical resistance elements and compare with the minimum                    1
   theoretical power that would be required by a heat pump. Re-
   peat the comparison using typical manufacturer's data for the                             Isothermal
   heat pump coefficient of performance.
                                                                       Q41 = 0  2
5.43 Plot the coefficient of performance max given by Eq. 5.9          4           Q23 = 0
   for TH  298 K versus TC ranging between 235 and 298 K. Dis-
   cuss the practical implications of the decrease in the coefficient  Isothermal  3
   of performance with decreasing temperature TC.                                        v  Figure P5.48

5.44 At steady state, a refrigerator whose coefficient of per-
   formance is 3 removes energy by heat transfer from a freezer
   compartment at 0C at the rate of 6000 kJ/h and discharges
204 Chapter 5 The Second Law of Thermodynamics                                  at 27C to a final volume of 0.01 m3. Using the results of
                                                                                Prob. 5.64 as needed, determine
5.49 One-tenth kilogram of air as an ideal gas with k  1.4
   executes a Carnot refrigeration cycle, as shown in Fig. 5.13.                (a) the pressure, in kPa, at each of the four principal states.
   The isothermal expansion occurs at 23C with a heat trans-                    (b) the work, in kJ, for each of the four processes.Design
   fer to the air of 3.4 kJ. The isothermal compression occurs

Design & Open Ended Problems: Exploring Engineering Practice

5.1D Write a paper outlining the contributions of Carnot, Clau-                    technologies that might lead to appreciable thermal efficiency
   sius, Kelvin, and Planck to the development of the second law                   gains.
   of thermodynamics. In what ways did the now-discredited
   caloric theory influence the development of the second law as                5.6D Abandoned lead mines near Park Hills, Missouri are filled
   we know it today? What is the historical basis for the idea of                  with an estimated 2.5  108 m3 of water at an almost constant
   a perpetual motion machine of the second kind that is some-                     temperature of 14C. How might this resource be exploited for
   times used to state the second law?                                             heating and cooling of the town's dwellings and commercial
                                                                                   buildings? A newspaper article refers to the water-filled mines
5.2D The heat transfer rate through the walls and roof of a build-                 as a free source of heating and cooling. Discuss this charac-
   ing is 3570 kJ/h per degree temperature difference between the                  terization.
   inside and outside. For outdoor temperatures ranging from 15 to
   20C, make a comparison of the daily cost of maintaining the                  5.7D The Minto Wheel is a power-producing device activated
   building at 20C by means of an electric heat pump, direct elec-                 by evaporating and condensing a working substance. The only
   tric resistance heating, and a conventional gas-fired furnace.                  energy input would be from a waste heat or solar source. Write
                                                                                   a paper explaining the operating principles of the device. In-
5.3D To maintain the passenger compartment of an automobile                        dicate whether the Minto wheel operates as a thermodynamic
   traveling at 13.4 m/s at 21C when the surrounding air tem-                      power cycle, and if so give the range of thermal efficiencies
   perature is 32C, the vehicle's air conditioner removes 5.275 kW                 that might be achieved. Evaluate propane as a working sub-
   by heat transfer. Estimate the amount of engine horsepower                      stance and suggest an alternative. How would the wheel di-
   required to drive the air conditioner. Referring to typical                     ameter and the volumes of the containers holding the working
   manufacturer's data, compare your estimate with the actual                      substance affect performance? Are there any practical appli-
   horsepower requirement. Discuss the relationship between the                    cations for such a device? Discuss.
   initial unit cost of an automobile air-conditioning system and
   its operating cost.                                                          5.8D Figure P5.8D shows a device for pumping water without
                                                                                   the use of an electrical or fuel input. The container (1) holds
5.4D Prepare a memorandum discussing alternative means for                         a suitable liquid working substance separated from a quantity
   achieving the required cooling of a 1000 MW power plant lo-                     of air by a flexible bladder (2). During the daytime, heat trans-
   cated on the river of Problem 5.38. Discuss environmental                       fer from the warm surroundings vaporizes some of the liquid,
   issues related to each of your alternatives.                                    thereby displacing the bladder and forcing air through the pipe
                                                                                   (3) into the top of the chamber (4) below. As the air enters the
5.5D Figure P5.5D shows that the typical thermal efficiency of                     lower chamber, it pushes against the top of the piston (5). The
   U.S. power plants increased rapidly from 1925 to 1960, but                      displacement of the piston pumps water from the chamber
   has increased only gradually since then. Discuss the most                       through the lift pipe (6) and into the collection tank (7). At
   important factors contributing to this plateauing of thermal                    night, heat transfer to the cooler surroundings causes the va-
   efficiency and the most promising near-term and long-term                       por to condense, thereby restoring the bladder to its original
                                                                                   position and recharging the lower chamber. Critically evaluate
     40                                                                            this device for pumping water. Specify a suitable working sub-
                                                                                   stance. Does the device operate in a thermodynamic power cy-
Thermal efficiency, %  30                                                          cle? If so, estimate the range of thermal efficiencies that might
                                                                                   be expected. Propose a means for pumping water with this type
                       20                                                          of device more than once a day. Write a report of your findings.

                       0                                                        5.9D A method for generating electricity using gravitational
                             1925 1935 1945 1955 1965 1975 1985                    energy is described in U.S. Patent No. 4,980,572. The method
                                                                                   employs massive spinning wheels located underground that
                           Year                                   Figure P5.5D     serve as the prime mover of an alternator for generating elec-
                                                                                   tricity. Each wheel is kept in motion by torque pulses trans-
                                                                                   mitted to it via a suitable mechanism from vehicles passing
                                                                                   overhead. What practical difficulties might be encountered in
                                                                                   implementing such a method for generating electricity? If the
                                                                                   vehicles are trolleys on an existing urban transit system, might
                                                                                   this be a cost-effective way to generate electricity? If the
                 1                          Design & Open Ended Problems: Exploring Engineering Practice 205
                 2
Trapped air            Working substance
                                                   7
                 3
                            Valve

                       1. Container

                       2. Flexible bladder

                    6  3. Air pipe

                       4. Chamber with one-way (check) valve

                       5. Piston

                       6. Water pipe with one-way valve

                       7. Water collection tank

          5

          4
One-way valve

                                                                     Figure P5.8D

   vehicle motion were sustained by the electricity generated,         been inspired by such an analysis. Does the concept have
   would this be an example of a perpetual motion machine?             scientific merit? Engineering merit? Discuss.
   Discuss.
                                                                    5.11D Urban Heat Islands Worrisome (see box Sec. 5.3). In-
5.10D A technical article considers hurricanes as an example           vestigate adverse health conditions that might be exacerbated
   of a natural Carnot engine (K. A. Emmanuel, "Toward a Gen-          for persons living in urban heat islands. Write a report in-
   eral Theory of Hurricanes," American Scientist, 76, 371­379,        cluding at least three references.
   1988). A subsequent U.S. Patent (No. 4,885,913) is said to have
                                     C  Using Entropy
                                     H
                                     A
                                     P

                     6T
                                     E
                                     R

chapter objective    E N G I N E E R I N G C O N T E X T Up to this point, our study of the sec-
                     ond law has been concerned primarily with what it says about systems undergoing
                     thermodynamic cycles. In this chapter means are introduced for analyzing systems from
                     the second law perspective as they undergo processes that are not necessarily cycles.
                     The property entropy plays a prominent part in these considerations. The objective of the
                     present chapter is to introduce entropy and show its use for thermodynamic analysis.

                        The word energy is so much a part of the language that you were undoubtedly familiar
                     with the term before encountering it in early science courses. This familiarity probably
                     facilitated the study of energy in these courses and in the current course in engineering
                     thermodynamics. In the present chapter you will see that the analysis of systems from a
                     second law perspective is conveniently accomplished in terms of the property entropy.
                     Energy and entropy are both abstract concepts. However, unlike energy, the word entropy is
                     seldom heard in everyday conversation, and you may never have dealt with it quantitatively
                     before. Energy and entropy play important roles in the remaining chapters of this book.

                     6.1 Introducing Entropy

                     Corollaries of the second law are developed in Chap. 5 for systems undergoing cycles while
                     communicating thermally with two reservoirs, a hot reservoir and a cold reservoir. In the
                     present section a corollary of the second law known as the Clausius inequality is introduced
                     that is applicable to any cycle without regard for the body, or bodies, from which the cycle
                     receives energy by heat transfer or to which the cycle rejects energy by heat transfer. The
                     Clausius inequality provides the basis for introducing two ideas instrumental for analyses of
                     both closed systems and control volumes from a second law perspective: the property entropy
                     (Sec. 6.2) and the entropy balance (Secs. 6.5 and 6.6).

                         The Clausius inequality states that for any thermodynamic cycle

Clausius inequality                     ~ a dQb  0  (6.1)
206                                          Tb

                     where Q represents the heat transfer at a part of the system boundary during a portion of the
                     cycle, and T is the absolute temperature at that part of the boundary. The subscript "b" serves
                     as a reminder that the integrand is evaluated at the boundary of the system executing the cycle.
                     The symbol  indicates that the integral is to be performed over all parts of the boundary and
                                                                                                                               6.1 Introducing Entropy 207

over the entire cycle. The equality and inequality have the same interpretation as in the
Kelvin­Planck statement: the equality applies when there are no internal irreversibilities as
the system executes the cycle, and the inequality applies when internal irreversibilities are
present. The Clausius inequality can be demonstrated using the Kelvin­Planck statement of
the second law (see box).

DEVELOPING THE CLAUSIUS INEQUALITY

The Clausius inequality can be demonstrated using the arrangement of Fig. 6.1. A sys-
tem receives energy Q at a location on its boundary where the absolute temperature
is T while the system develops work W. In keeping with our sign convention for heat
transfer, the phrase receives energy Q includes the possibility of heat transfer from
the system. The energy Q is received from (or absorbed by) a thermal reservoir at
Tres. To ensure that no irreversibility is introduced as a result of heat transfer between
the reservoir and the system, let it be accomplished through an intermediary system

that undergoes a cycle without irreversibilities of any kind. The cycle receives energy
Q from the reservoir and supplies Q to the system while producing work W. From
the definition of the Kelvin scale (Eq. 5.6), we have the following relationship between

the heat transfers and temperatures:

         dQż  a dQb                            (a)
         Tres          Tb

As temperature may vary, a multiplicity of such reversible cycles may be required.
   Consider next the combined system shown by the dotted line on Fig. 6.1. An en-

ergy balance for the combined system is

                                         dEC  dQż  dWC

where WC is the total work of the combined system, the sum of W and W, and dEC
denotes the change in energy of the combined system. Solving the energy balance for
WC and using Eq. (a) to eliminate Q from the resulting expression yields

   dWC     Tres  a  dQ  b      dEC
                     T
                          b

Now, let the system undergo a single cycle while the intermediary system undergoes
one or more cycles. The total work of the combined system is

         adQb                 0        a dQ b
           Tb                            Tb
                       dEC  Tres
~   WC Tres         ~               ~          (b)

Since the reservoir temperature is constant, Tres can be brought outside the integral. The
term involving the energy of the combined system vanishes because the energy change
for any cycle is zero. The combined system operates in a cycle because its parts exe-
cute cycles. Since the combined system undergoes a cycle and exchanges energy by
heat transfer with a single reservoir, Eq. 5.1 expressing the Kelvin­Planck statement
of the second law must be satisfied. Using this, Eq. (b) reduces to give Eq. 6.1, where
the equality applies when there are no irreversibilities within the system as it executes
the cycle and the inequality applies when internal irreversibilities are present. This in-
terpretation actually refers to the combination of system plus intermediary cycle. How-
ever, the intermediary cycle is regarded as free of irreversibilities, so the only possible
site of irreversibilities is the system alone.
208 Chapter 6 Using Entropy

                                             Reservoir at Tres

                                   Combined     Q´
                                   system                      Intermediary
                                   boundary                    cycle

                                                                    W´

                                                Q

                                             T

                                             System                W

                                                             System boundary       Figure 6.1 Illustration used to develop the
                                                                                  Clausius inequality.

                                   Equation 6.1 can be expressed equivalently as

                                                                ~  a dQb       scycle                           (6.2)
                                                                      Tb

                                   where cycle can be viewed as representing the "strength" of the inequality. The value of cycle
                                   is positive when internal irreversibilities are present, zero when no internal irreversibilities

                                   are present, and can never be negative. In summary, the nature of a cycle executed by a sys-
                                   tem is indicated by the value for cycle as follows:

                                             scycle  0          no irreversibilities present within the system
                                             scycle 7 0         irreversibilities present within the system

                                             scycle 6 0 impossible

                                   Accordingly, cycle is a measure of the effect of the irreversibilities present within the system
                                   executing the cycle. This point is developed further in Sec. 6.5, where cycle is identified as

                                   the entropy produced (or generated) by internal irreversibilities during the cycle.

                                2  6.2 Defining Entropy Change

          C                        A quantity is a property if, and only if, its change in value between two states is independ-
            B                      ent of the process (Sec. 1.3). This aspect of the property concept is used in the present sec-
                     A             tion together with Eq. 6.2 to introduce entropy.

1                                      Two cycles executed by a closed system are represented in Fig. 6.2. One cycle consists
 Figure 6.2 Two in-                of an internally reversible process A from state 1 to state 2, followed by internally reversible
ternally reversible cycles.        process C from state 2 to state 1. The other cycle consists of an internally reversible process
                                   B from state 1 to state 2, followed by the same process C from state 2 to state 1 as in the
                                   first cycle. For the first cycle, Eq. 6.2 takes the form

                                                                2 dQ b  a      1  dQb            0
                                                                1TA           2    TC
                                                               a                          scycle                (6.3a)

                                   and for the second cycle

                                                                2 dQ b  a      1  dQ b           0
                                                                1TB           2    TC
                                                               a                          scycle                (6.3b)

                                   In writing Eqs. 6.3, the term cycle has been set to zero since the cycles are composed of
                                   internally reversible processes.
                                                           6.3 Retrieving Entropy Data 209

When Eq. 6.3b is subtracted from Eq. 6.3a

  a 2 dQb  a 2 dQb
1 TA                                          1 TB

This shows that the integral of QT is the same for both processes. Since A and B are ar-
bitrary, it follows that the integral of QT has the same value for any internally reversible
process between the two states. In other words, the value of the integral depends on the end
states only. It can be concluded, therefore, that the integral represents the change in some
property of the system.

   Selecting the symbol S to denote this property, which is called entropy, its change is
given by

 S2  S1  a                                    2 dQ b  int             definition of entropy
                                           1T         rev  (6.4a) change

where the subscript "int rev" is added as a reminder that the integration is carried out for
any internally reversible process linking the two states. Equation 6.4a is the definition of
entropy change. On a differential basis, the defining equation for entropy change takes
the form

dS  adQb                                      int          (6.4b)
                                           T  rev

Entropy is an extensive property.                                                                  units for entropy
   The SI unit for entropy is J/K. However, in this book it is convenient to work in terms

of kJ/K. Units in SI for specific entropy are kJ/kg # K for s and kJ/kmol # K for s.
   Since entropy is a property, the change in entropy of a system in going from one state to

another is the same for all processes, both internally reversible and irreversible, between these
two states. Thus, Eq. 6.4a allows the determination of the change in entropy, and once it has
been evaluated, this is the magnitude of the entropy change for all processes of the system
between the two states. The evaluation of entropy change is discussed further in the next
section.

   It should be clear that entropy is defined and evaluated in terms of a particular integral
for which no accompanying physical picture is given. We encountered this previously with
the property enthalpy. Enthalpy is introduced without physical motivation in Sec. 3.3.2. Then,
in Chap. 4, enthalpy is shown to be useful for thermodynamic analysis. As for the case of
enthalpy, to gain an appreciation for entropy you need to understand how it is used and what
it is used for.

6.3 Retrieving Entropy Data

In Chap. 3, we introduced means for retrieving property data, including tables, graphs, equa-
tions, and the software available with this text. The emphasis there is on evaluating the prop-
erties p, v, T, u, and h required for application of the conservation of mass and energy
principles. For application of the second law, entropy values are usually required. In this
section, means for retrieving entropy data are considered.
210 Chapter 6 Using Entropy

   6.3.1 General Considerations

  The defining equation for entropy change, Eq. 6.4a, serves as the basis for evaluating en-
  tropy relative to a reference value at a reference state. Both the reference value and the ref-
  erence state can be selected arbitrarily. The value of the entropy at any state y relative to the
  value at the reference state x is obtained in principle from

                                   Sy  Sx  a  y dQ b   int                         (6.5)
                                                    T  rev
                                            x

  where Sx is the reference value for entropy at the specified reference state.
     The use of entropy values determined relative to an arbitrary reference state is satisfac-

  tory as long as they are used in calculations involving entropy differences, for then the ref-
  erence value cancels. This approach suffices for applications where composition remains con-
  stant. When chemical reactions occur, it is necessary to work in terms of absolute values of
  entropy determined using the third law of thermodynamics (Chap. 13).

  ENTROPY DATA FOR WATER AND REFRIGERANTS

  Tables of thermodynamic data are introduced in Sec. 3.3 for water and several refrigerants
  (Tables A-2 through A-18). Specific entropy is tabulated in the same way as considered there
  for the properties v, u, and h, and entropy values are retrieved similarly.

  VAPOR DATA. In the superheat regions of the tables for water and the refrigerants, specific
  entropy is tabulated along with v, u, and h versus temperature and pressure.
   for example. . . consider two states of water. At state 1 the pressure is 3 MPa and the
  temperature is 500C. At state 2, the pressure is 0.3 MPa and the specific entropy is the same
  as at state 1, s2  s1. The object is to determine the temperature at state 2. Using T1 and p1,
  we find the specific entropy at state 1 from Table A-4 as s1  7.2338 kJkg # K. State 2 is
  fixed by the pressure, p2  0.3 MPa, and the specific entropy, s2  7.2338 kJkg # K. Returing
  to Table A-4 at 0.3 MPa and interpolating with s2 between 160 and 200C results in
  T2  183C. 

  SATURATION DATA. For saturation states, the values of sf and sg are tabulated as a func-
  tion of either saturation pressure or saturation temperature. The specific entropy of a two-
  phase liquid­vapor mixture is calculated using the quality

                             s  11  x2sf  xsg  sf  x1sg  sf2                       (6.6)

  These relations are identical in form to those for v, u, and h (Sec. 3.3).  for example. . .
  let us determine the specific entropy of Refrigerant 134a at a state where the temperature
  is 0C and the specific internal energy is 138.43 kJ/kg. Referring to Table A-10, we see that
  the given value for u falls between uf and ug at 0C, so the system is a two-phase liquid­vapor
  mixture. The quality of the mixture can be determined from the known specific internal

  energy

                             x    u  uf     138.43     49.79    0.5
                                  ug  uf    227.06     49.79

  Then with values from Table A-10

                             s  11  x2sf  xsg
                                10.52 10.19702  10.52 10.91902  0.5580 kJ/kg # K 
                                                                                                                          6.3 Retrieving Entropy Data 211

LIQUID DATA. Compressed liquid data are presented for water in Tables A-5. In these tables
s, v, u, and h are tabulated versus temperature and pressure as in the superheat tables, and
the tables are used similarly. In the absence of compressed liquid data, the value of the specific
entropy can be estimated in the same way as estimates for v and u are obtained for liquid
states (Sec. 3.3.6), by using the saturated liquid value at the given temperature

s1T, p2  sf 1T 2  (6.7) 

    for example. . . suppose the value of specific entropy is required for water at 25 bar,
200C. The specific entropy is obtained directly from Table A-5 as s  2.3294 kJkg # K. Using
the saturated liquid value for specific entropy at 200C from Table A-2, the specific entropy
is approximated with Eq. 6.7 as s  2.3309 kJkg # K, which agrees closely with the previous

value. 

   The specific entropy values for water and the refrigerants given in Tables A-2 through

A-18 are relative to the following reference states and values. For water, the entropy of
saturated liquid at 0.01C is set to zero. For the refrigerants, the entropy of the saturated liq-
uid at 40C is assigned a value of zero.

COMPUTER RETRIEVAL. The software available with this text, Interactive Thermodynam-                METHODOLOGY
ics: IT, provides data for the substances considered in this section. Entropy data are retrieved   UPDATE
by simple call statements placed in the workspace of the program.  for example. . .
consider a two-phase liquid­vapor mixture of H2O at p  1 bar, v  0.8475 m3/kg. The fol-            Note that IT does not
lowing illustrates how specific entropy and quality x are obtained using IT                        provide compressed liquid
                                                                                                   data for any substance. IT
    p = 1 // bar                                                                                   returns liquid entropy data
    v = 0.8475 // m3/kg                                                                            using the approximation of
    v = vsat_Px("Water/Steam",p,x)                                                                 Eq. 6.7. Similarly, Eqs. 3.11,
    s = ssat_Px("Water/Steam",p,x)                                                                 3.12, and 3.14 are used to
                                                                                                   return liquid values for v,
The software returns values of x  0.5 and s  4.331 kJ/kg # K, which can be checked using           u, and h, respectively.
data from Table A-3. Note that quality x is implicit in the list of arguments in the expression
for specific volume, and it is not necessary to solve explicitly for x. As another example, con-
sider superheated ammonia vapor at p  1.5 bar, T  8C. Specific entropy is obtained from
IT as follows:

    p = 1.5 // bar
    T = 8 // C
    s = s_PT("Ammonia",p,T)

The software returns s  5.981 kJ/kg # K, which agrees closely with the value obtained by
interpolation in Table A-15. 

USING GRAPHICAL ENTROPY DATA

The use of property diagrams as an adjunct to problem solving is emphasized throughout
this book. When applying the second law, it is frequently helpful to locate states and plot
processes on diagrams having entropy as a coordinate. Two commonly used figures having
entropy as one of the coordinates are the temperature­entropy diagram and the enthalpy­
entropy diagram.

TEMPERATURE­ENTROPY DIAGRAM. The main features of a temperature­entropy T­s diagram
diagram are shown in Fig. 6.3. For detailed figures for water in SI, see Fig. A-7. Observe
212 Chapter 6 Using Entropy                          h = constant                          h  p = constant
                                         T                     v = constant
                                                                    p = constant
                                                                          p = constant

                                                                                                                                                        T = constant

                                            Critical point

                                                                                                                                                        T = constant

                                            p = constant

                                            Saturated liquid
                                                                                                                    pp=S=catocunorsntastatenatdntvapor
                                            v = constant                                                                             x = 0.96
                                                                                                                              x = 0.90
                                            x = 0.2         Saturated vapor
                                                          x = 0.9                                  Critical point
                                                                                                                                                             s
                                                                                        s
                                                                                            Figure 6.4 Enthalpy­entropy diagram.
                  Figure 6.3 Temperature­entropy diagram.

Mollier diagram  that lines of constant enthalpy are shown on these figures. Also note that in the super-
                 heated vapor region constant specific volume lines have a steeper slope than constant-
                 pressure lines. Lines of constant quality are shown in the two-phase liquid­vapor region.
                 On some figures, lines of constant quality are marked as percent moisture lines. The per-
                 cent moisture is defined as the ratio of the mass of liquid to the total mass.

                    In the superheated vapor region of the T­s diagram, constant specific enthalpy lines be-
                 come nearly horizontal as pressure is reduced. These states are shown as the shaded area on
                 Fig. 6.3. For states in this region of the diagram, the enthalpy is determined primarily by the
                 temperature: h(T, p)  h(T). This is the region of the diagram where the ideal gas model
                 provides a reasonable approximation. For superheated vapor states outside the shaded area,
                 both temperature and pressure are required to evaluate enthalpy, and the ideal gas model is
                 not suitable.

                 ENTHALPY­ENTROPY DIAGRAM. The essential features of an enthalpy­ entropy diagram,
                 commonly known as a Mollier diagram, are shown in Fig. 6.4. For detailed figures for water
                 in SI, see Figs. A-8. Note the location of the critical point and the appearance of lines of
                 constant temperature and constant pressure. Lines of constant quality are shown in the two-
                 phase liquid­vapor region (some figures give lines of constant percent moisture). The figure
                 is intended for evaluating properties at superheated vapor states and for two-phase liquid­
                 vapor mixtures. Liquid data are seldom shown. In the superheated vapor region, constant-
                 temperature lines become nearly horizontal as pressure is reduced. These states are shown,
                 approximately, as the shaded area on Fig. 6.4. This area corresponds to the shaded area on
                 the temperature­entropy diagram of Fig. 6.3, where the ideal gas model provides a reasonable
                 approximation.

                     for example. . . to illustrate the use of the Mollier diagram in SI units, consider
                 two states of water. At state 1, T1  240C, p1  0.10 MPa. The specific enthalpy and
                                                                     6.3 Retrieving Entropy Data 213

quality are required at state 2, where p2  0.01 MPa and s2  s1. Turning to Fig. A-8, state 1
is located in the superheated vapor region. Dropping a vertical line into the two-phase

liquid­vapor region, state 2 is located. The quality and specific enthalpy at state 2 read
from the figure agree closely with values obtained using Tables A-3 and A-4: x2  0.98 and
h2  2537 kJ/ kg. 

USING THE T dS EQUATIONS

Although the change in entropy between two states can be determined in principle by using
Eq. 6.4a, such evaluations are generally conducted using the T dS equations developed in
this section. The T dS equations allow entropy changes to be evaluated from other more read-
ily determined property data. The use of the T dS equations to evaluate entropy changes for
ideal gases is illustrated in Sec. 6.3.2 and for incompressible substances in Sec. 6.3.3. The
importance of the T dS equations is greater than their role in assigning entropy values, how-
ever. In Chap. 11 they are used as a point of departure for deriving many important property
relations for pure, simple compressible systems, including means for constructing the prop-
erty tables giving u, h, and s.

   The T dS equations are developed by considering a pure, simple compressible system un-
dergoing an internally reversible process. In the absence of overall system motion and the
effects of gravity, an energy balance in differential form is

1dQ2rinevt  dU  1dW2irnetv                                           (6.8)

By definition of simple compressible system (Sec. 3.1), the work is

                          1dW2rinevt  p dV                           (6.9a)

On rearrangement of Eq. 6.4b, the heat transfer is

                          1dQ2rinevt  T dS                           (6.9b)

Substituting Eqs. 6.9 into Eq. 6.8, the first T dS equation results

                          T dS  dU  pdV                              (6.10) first T dS equation

   The second T dS equation is obtained from Eq. 6.10 using H  U  pV. Forming the
differential

                              dH  dU  d1pV2  dU  p dV  V dp
On rearrangement

                                        dU  p dV  dH  V dp
Substituting this into Eq. 6.10 gives the second T dS equation

                          T dS  dH  V dp                             (6.11) second T dS equation

The T dS equations can be written on a unit mass basis as

                          T ds  du  pdv                              (6.12a)
                          T ds  dh  vdp                              (6.12b)
214 Chapter 6 Using Entropy

                                or on a per mole basis as

                                                                         T ds  du  pdv                                  (6.13a)
                                                                         T d s  dh  vdp                                 (6.13b)

   Although the T dS equations are derived by considering an internally reversible process,
an entropy change obtained by integrating these equations is the change for any process, re-
versible or irreversible, between two equilibrium states of a system. Because entropy is a
property, the change in entropy between two states is independent of the details of the process
linking the states.

   To show the use of the T dS equations, consider a change in phase from saturated liquid
to saturated vapor at constant temperature and pressure. Since pressure is constant, Eq. 6.12b
reduces to give

                                                                               ds  dh
                                                                                      T

Then, because temperature is also constant during the phase change

                                                                         sg    sf    hg     hf                          (6.14)
                                                                                         T

This relationship shows how sg  sf is calculated for tabulation in property tables.
 for example. . . consider Refrigerant 134a at 0C. From Table A-10, hg  hf 

197.21 kJ/kg, so with Eq. 6.14

                                                           sg      sf    197.21 kJ/ kg      0.7220    kJ
                                                                           273.15 K                 kg # K

which is the value calculated using sf and sg from the table. 

 6.3.2 Entropy Change of an Ideal Gas

In this section the T dS equations are used to evaluate the entropy change between two states
of an ideal gas. It is convenient to begin with Eqs. 6.12 expressed as

                                                                         ds  du  p dv                                   (6.15)
                                                                                TT                                      (6.16)

                                                                         ds  dh  v dp
                                                                                TT

   For an ideal gas, du  cv(T ) dT, dh  cp(T ) dT, and pv  RT. With these relations,
Eqs. 6.15 and 6.16 become, respectively

ds    cv1T                                                 2   dT        dv        and      ds    cp1T  2  dT    R  dp  (6.17)
                                                               T       Rv                                  T        p

   Since R is a constant, the last terms of Eqs. 6.17 can be integrated directly. However, because
cv and cp are functions of temperature for ideal gases, it is necessary to have information about
                                                                                   6.3 Retrieving Entropy Data 215

the functional relationships before the integration of the first term in these equations can be
performed. Since the two specific heats are related by

                                  cp1T 2  cv1T 2  R                                (3.44)

where R is the gas constant, knowledge of either specific heat function suffices.
   On integration, Eqs. 6.17 give, respectively

 s1T2, v22  s1T1, v12                            T2  cv1T 2  dT     R  ln  v2      (6.18)
                                                T1           T             v1      (6.19)

 s1T2, p22  s1T1, p12                            T2          dT     R  ln p2
                                                             T           p1
                                                  cp1T 2

                                                T1

USING IDEAL GAS TABLES. As for internal energy and enthalpy changes, the evaluation
of entropy changes for ideal gases can be reduced to a convenient tabular approach. To in-
troduce this, we begin by selecting a reference state and reference value: The value of the spe-
cific entropy is set to zero at the state where the temperature is 0 K and the pressure is 1 at-
mosphere. Then, using Eq. 6.19, the specific entropy at a state where the temperature is T and
the pressure is 1 atm is determined relative to this reference state and reference value as

                                   s°1T 2       T cp1T 2                           (6.20)
                                                         dT
                                                0T

The symbol s(T ) denotes the specific entropy at temperature T and a pressure of 1 atm.
Because s depends only on temperature, it can be tabulated versus temperature, like
h and u. For air as an ideal gas, s with units of kJ/kg # K is given in Tables A-22.Values
of s° for several other common gases are given in Tables A-23 with units of kJ/kmol # K.
Since the integral of Eq. 6.19 can be expressed in terms of s

                              T2 dT
                                              T2 dT          T1 dT
                                T1 cp T  0 cp T  0 cp T

                                          s°1T22  s°1T12

it follows that Eq. 6.19 can be written as

s1T2,                      p22    s1T1,  p12    s°1T22     s°1T12     R   ln  p2   (6.21a) 
                                                                              p1

or on a per mole basis as

s1T2,                      p22    s1T1,  p12    s °1T22    s °1T12     R   ln p2   (6.21b) 
                                                                             p1

   Using Eqs. 6.21 and the tabulated values for s or s°, as appropriate, entropy changes
can be determined that account explicitly for the variation of specific heat with temperature.
 for example. . . let us evaluate the change in specific entropy, in kJkg # K, of air
modeled as an ideal gas from a state where T1  300 K and p1  1 bar to a state where
216 Chapter 6 Using Entropy

  T2  1000 K and p2  3 bar. Using Eq. 6.21a and data from Table A-22

                             s2    s1      s°1T22       s°1T12        R  ln  p2
                                                                             p1

                                           12.96770        1.702032        kJ            8.314     kJ         3 bar
                                                                         kg # K          28.97   kg # K     ln

                                                                                                              1 bar

                                        0.9504 kJ/kg # K 

     If a table giving s (or s°) is not available for a particular gas of interest, the integrals of
  Eqs. 6.18 and 6.19 can be performed analytically or numerically using specific heat data such
  as provided in Tables A-20 and A-21.

  ASSUMING CONSTANT SPECIFIC HEATS. When the specific heats cv and cp are taken as
  constants, Eqs. 6.18 and 6.19 reduce, respectively, to

                                           s1T2,   v22     s1T1,  v12        cv  ln T2     R  ln  v2                  (6.22)
                                                                                   T1             v1

                                                                                     T2           p2
                                           s1T2,  p22      s1T1,  p12        cp  ln  T1    R  ln  p1                  (6.23)

  These equations, along with Eqs. 3.50 and 3.51 giving u and h, respectively, are applica-
  ble when assuming the ideal gas model with constant specific heats.

      for example. . . let us determine the change in specific entropy, in kJ/kg # K, of air

  as an ideal gas undergoing a process from T1  300 K, p1  1 bar to T2  400 K, p2  5 bar.
  Because of the relatively small temperature range, we assume a constant value of cp evaluated
  at 350 K. Using Eq. 6.23 and cp  1.008 kJ/kg # K from Table A-20

                             ˘s    cp  ln  T2      R  ln   p2
                                           T1              p1

                                   a1.008        kJ     b  ln a  400  Kb         a  8.314    kJ    b  ln a  5  bar b
                                               kg # K            300  K             28.97  kg # K           1  bar

                                  0.1719 kJ/kg # K 

  COMPUTER RETRIEVAL. For air and other gases modeled as ideal gases, IT directly returns
  s(T, p) based upon the following form of Eq. 6.19

                                        s1T, p2  s1Tref, pref2           T cp1T 2 dT  R ln p
                                                                         T Tref                       pref

  and the following choice of reference state and reference value: Tref  0 K (0R), pref 
  1 atm, and s(Tref, pref)  0, giving

                                                s1T, p2  T cp1T 2 dT  R ln p               pref
                                                                 0T

     Changes in specific entropy evaluated using IT agree with entropy changes evaluated
  using ideal gas tables.  for example. . . consider a process of air as an ideal gas from
  T1  300 K, p1  1 bar to T2  1000 K, p2  3 bar. The change in specific entropy, denoted
                                                                                      6.4 Entropy Change in Internally Reversible Processes 217

as dels, is determined in SI units using IT as follows:

    p1 = 1 // bar
    T1 = 300 // K
    p2 = 3
    T2 = 1000
    s1 = s_TP("Air",T1,p1)
    s2 = s_TP("Air",T2,p2)
    dels = s2 ­ s1

The software returns values of s1  1.706, s2  2.656, and dels  0.9501, all in units of
kJ/kg # K. This value for s agrees with the value obtained using Table A-22 in the example
following Eqs. 6.21.  Note that IT returns specific entropy directly and does not use the
special function s.

 6.3.3 Entropy Change of an Incompressible Substance

The incompressible substance model introduced in Sec. 3.3.6 assumes that the specific vol-
ume (density) is constant and the specific heat depends solely on temperature, cv  c(T ). Ac-
cordingly, the differential change in specific internal energy is du  c(T) dT and Eq. 6.15

reduces to

                                                      0

                           c1T 2 dT pdv c1T 2 dT
          ds                                       
                               T              T           T

On integration, the change in specific entropy is

    s2  s1                 T2 c1T 2    dT        1incompressible2
                                   T
                         T1

When the specific heat is assumed constant, this becomes

s2    s1    c  ln          T2        1incompressible, constant c2  (6.24) 
                           T1

Equation 6.24, along with Eqs. 3.20 giving u and h, respectively, are applicable to liquids
and solids modeled as incompressible. Specific heats of some common liquids and solids are
given in Table A-19.

6.4 Entropy Change in Internally
         Reversible Processes

In this section the relationship between entropy change and heat transfer for internally re-
versible processes is considered. The concepts introduced have important applications in sub-
sequent sections of the book. The present discussion is limited to the case of closed systems.
Similar considerations for control volumes are presented in Sec. 6.9.

   As a closed system undergoes an internally reversible process, its entropy can increase,
decrease, or remain constant. This can be brought out using Eq. 6.4b

                             dS  a dQ b          int
                                           T     rev
218 Chapter 6 Using Entropy

isentropic process                  which indicates that when a closed system undergoing an internally reversible process receives
                                    energy by heat transfer, the system experiences an increase in entropy. Conversely, when en-
             Qint =       2  T  dS  ergy is removed from the system by heat transfer, the entropy of the system decreases. This
                          1         can be interpreted to mean that an entropy transfer accompanies heat transfer. The direction
                     rev            of the entropy transfer is the same as that of the heat transfer. In an adiabatic internally
                                2   reversible process, the entropy would remain constant. A constant-entropy process is called
T (Q)int = T dS                     an isentropic process.

            rev                        On rearrangement, the above expression gives

                                                                                   1dQ2int  T dS
                                                                                                                     rev

                                    Integrating from an initial state 1 to a final state 2

1                                                          2

                                                      Qint  T dS                                             (6.25) 
                                                      rev
                                                               1

                               S       From Eq. 6.25 it can be concluded that an energy transfer by heat to a closed system dur-
 Figure 6.5 Area                    ing an internally reversible process can be represented as an area on a temperature­entropy
representation of heat              diagram. Figure 6.5 illustrates the area interpretation of heat transfer for an arbitrary inter-
transfer for an internally          nally reversible process in which temperature varies. Carefully note that temperature must
reversible process of a             be in kelvins or degrees Rankine, and the area is the entire area under the curve (shown
closed system.                      shaded). Also note that the area interpretation of heat transfer is not valid for irreversible
                                    processes, as will be demonstrated later.
Carnot cycle
                                       To provide an example illustrating both the entropy change that accompanies heat transfer
                                    and the area interpretation of heat transfer, consider Fig. 6.6a, which shows a Carnot power
                                    cycle (Sec. 5.6). The cycle consists of four internally reversible processes in series: two
                                    isothermal processes alternated with two adiabatic processes. In Process 2­3, heat transfer
                                    to the system occurs while the temperature of the system remains constant at TH. The sys-
                                    tem entropy increases due to the accompanying entropy transfer. For this process, Eq. 6.25
                                    gives Q23  TH(S3  S2), so area 2­3­a­b­2 on Fig. 6.6a represents the heat transfer during
                                    the process. Process 3­4 is an adiabatic and internally reversible process and thus is an isen-
                                    tropic (constant-entropy) process. Process 4­1 is an isothermal process at TC during which
                                    heat is transferred from the system. Since entropy transfer accompanies the heat transfer, sys-
                                    tem entropy decreases. For this process, Eq. 6.25 gives Q41  TC(S1  S4), which is nega-
                                    tive in value. Area 4­1­b­a­4 on Fig. 6.6a represents the magnitude of the heat transfer Q41.
                                    Process 1­2, which completes the cycle, is adiabatic and internally reversible (isentropic).

                                       TH  2       3       TH     4       3

                                    T                 T

                                       TC  1       4       TC     1       2

                                           b       a              b       a

                                              S                      S

                                              (a)                    (b)

                                     Figure 6.6 Carnot cycles on the temperature­entropy diagram. (a) Power
                                    cycle. (b) Refrigeration or heat pump cycle.
                                                                                      6.4 Entropy Change in Internally Reversible Processes 219

   The net work of any cycle is equal to the net heat transfer, so enclosed area 1­2­3­4­1
represents the net work of the cycle. The thermal efficiency of the cycle may also be ex-
pressed in terms of areas:

                                     h  Wcycle  area 1­2­3­4­1
                                             Q23 area 2­3­a­b­2

The numerator of this expression is (TH  TC)(S3  S2) and the denominator is TH(S3  S2),
so the thermal efficiency can be given in terms of temperatures only as   1  TCTH. If
the cycle were executed as shown in Fig. 6.6b, the result would be a Carnot refrigeration or
heat pump cycle. In such a cycle, heat is transferred to the system while its temperature re-
mains at TC, so entropy increases during Process 1­2. In Process 3­4 heat is transferred from
the system while the temperature remains constant at TH and entropy decreases.

   To further illustrate concepts introduced in this section, the next example considers water
undergoing an internally reversible process while contained in a piston­cylinder assembly.

   E X A M P L E 6 . 1 Internally Reversible Process of Water

   Water, initially a saturated liquid at 100C, is contained in a piston­cylinder assembly. The water undergoes a process to the
   corresponding saturated vapor state, during which the piston moves freely in the cylinder. If the change of state is brought
   about by heating the water as it undergoes an internally reversible process at constant pressure and temperature, determine the
   work and heat transfer per unit of mass, each in kJ/kg.

   SOLUTION

   Known: Water contained in a piston­cylinder assembly undergoes an internally reversible process at 100C from saturated
   liquid to saturated vapor.

   Find: Determine the work and heat transfer per unit mass.

   Schematic and Given Data:

                        p                 T

                           f        g   100°C           g
                                       100°C
                                               f

Water  System boundary        ­Wm­                ­mQ­

                                       v                                          s

                                                                                      Figure E6.1

Assumptions:

1. The water in the piston­cylinder assembly is a closed system.
2. The process is internally reversible.
3. Temperature and pressure are constant during the process.
4. There is no change in kinetic or potential energy between the two end states.
220 Chapter 6 Using Entropy

  Analysis: At constant pressure the work is

                                               W      g

                                                     p dv  p1vg  vf2
                                              m
                                                   f

  With values from Table A-2

                     W          11.014 bar2 11.673  1.0435   1032 a m3 b    ` 105 N/m2 `  `      1 kJ  m  `
                     m                                                  kg     1 bar          103 N #

                               170 kJ/kg

      Since the process is internally reversible and at constant temperature, Eq. 6.25 gives

                                                      g         g
                                                Q  T dS  m T ds
                                                   f         f

  or

                                              Q
                                              m  T 1sg  sf2

  With values from Table A-2

                                Q
                                    1373.15 K217.3549  1.30692 kJ/ kg # K  2257 kJ/kg
                                m

  As shown in the accompanying figure, the work and heat transfer can be represented as areas on p­v and T­s diagrams,
  respectively.

   The heat transfer can be evaluated alternatively from an energy balance written on a unit mass basis as

                                                           QW
                                              ug  uf  m  m

      Introducing Wm  p(vg  vf) and solving

                                              Q
                                              m  1ug  uf2  p1vg  vf2

                                               1ug  pvg2  1uf  pvf2
                                               hg  hf

      From Table A-2 at 100C, hg  hf  2257 kJ/kg, which is the same value for Qm as obtained in the solution.

                     6.5 Entropy Balance for Closed Systems
                     In this section, the Clausius inequality expressed by Eq. 6.2 and the defining equation for

                     entropy change are used to develop the entropy balance for closed systems. The entropy bal-

                     ance is an expression of the second law that is particularly convenient for thermodynamic

                     2 analysis. The current presentation is limited to closed systems. The entropy balance is ex-

  R                  tended to control volumes in Sec. 6.6.

                  I   6.5.1 Developing the Entropy Balance

1                    Shown in Fig. 6.7 is a cycle executed by a closed system. The cycle consists of process I,
 Figure 6.7 Cycle    during which internal irreversibilities are present, followed by internally reversible process
used to develop the  R. For this cycle, Eq. 6.2 takes the form
entropy balance.
                                                           2 a dQb  1 a dQb  s    int                          (6.26)
                                                            1 Tb               T  rev
                                                                            2
                                                                   6.5 Entropy Balance for Closed Systems 221

where the first integral is for process I and the second is for process R. The subscript b in the
first integral serves as a reminder that the integrand is evaluated at the system boundary. The sub-
script is not required in the second integral because temperature is uniform throughout the system
at each intermediate state of an internally reversible process. Since no irreversibilities are
associated with process R, the term cycle of Eq. 6.2, which accounts for the effect of
irreversibilities during the cycle, refers only to process I and is shown in Eq. 6.26 simply as .

   Applying the definition of entropy change, we can express the second integral of Eq. 6.26 as

                                  S1  S2         1 a dQ b  int
                                                   T       rev
                                            2

With this, Eq. 6.26 becomes

                             2   a  dQ b    1S1    S22          s
                              1      Tb

Finally, on rearranging the last equation, the closed system entropy balance results

                              S2  S1      2 a dQ b              s                                closed system entropy
                                          1 Tb
                                                                                      (6.27)  balance
                             entropy entropy entropy

                             change transfer production

   If the end states are fixed, the entropy change on the left side of Eq. 6.27 can be evaluated      entropy transfer
independently of the details of the process. However, the two terms on the right side depend          accompanying heat
explicitly on the nature of the process and cannot be determined solely from knowledge of             transfer
the end states. The first term on the right side of Eq. 6.27 is associated with heat transfer to
or from the system during the process. This term can be interpreted as the entropy transfer           entropy production
accompanying heat transfer. The direction of entropy transfer is the same as the direction of
the heat transfer, and the same sign convention applies as for heat transfer: A positive value
means that entropy is transferred into the system, and a negative value means that entropy is
transferred out. When there is no heat transfer, there is no entropy transfer.

   The entropy change of a system is not accounted for solely by the entropy transfer, but is
due in part to the second term on the right side of Eq. 6.27 denoted by . The term  is pos-
itive when internal irreversibilities are present during the process and vanishes when no in-
ternal irreversibilities are present. This can be described by saying that entropy is produced
within the system by the action of irreversibilities. The second law of thermodynamics can
be interpreted as requiring that entropy is produced by irreversibilities and conserved only
in the limit as irreversibilities are reduced to zero. Since  measures the effect of irre-
versibilities present within the system during a process, its value depends on the nature of
the process and not solely on the end states. It is not a property.

   When applying the entropy balance to a closed system, it is essential to remember the re-
quirements imposed by the second law on entropy production: The second law requires that
entropy production be positive, or zero, in value

s:  e  7  0                  irreversibilities present within the system              (6.28)
          0                  no irreversibilities present within the system

The value of the entropy production cannot be negative. By contrast, the change in entropy

of the system may be positive, negative, or zero:

                                                 70                                   (6.29)
                                    S2  S1: ·  0

                                                 60

Like other properties, entropy change can be determined without knowledge of the details
of the process.
222 Chapter 6 Using Entropy

                                                  This portion of the
                                           boundary is at temperature Tb

Reservoir    Gas or liquid
     at Tb  Q

            Q/Tb

                                                                                               Figure 6.8 Illustration of the
                                                                                              entropy transfer and entropy production
                                                                                              concepts.

    for example. . . to illustrate the entropy transfer and entropy production concepts,
as well as the accounting nature of entropy balance, consider Fig. 6.8. The figure shows a
system consisting of a gas or liquid in a rigid container stirred by a paddle wheel while re-
ceiving a heat transfer Q from a reservoir. The temperature at the portion of the boundary
where heat transfer occurs is the same as the constant temperature of the reservoir, Tb. By
definition, the reservoir is free of irreversibilities; however, the system is not without irre-
versibilities, for fluid friction is evidently present, and there may be other irreversibilities
within the system.

   Let us now apply the entropy balance to the system and to the reservoir. Since Tb is con-
stant, the integral in Eq. 6.27 is readily evaluated, and the entropy balance for the system
reduces to

                                                                                        Q            (6.30)
                                                                          S2  S1  Tb  s

where QTb accounts for entropy transfer into the system accompanying heat transfer Q. The
entropy balance for the reservoir takes the form

                                                                          ˘S 4 res    Qres        0
                                                                                      Tb
                                                                                              sres

where the entropy production term is set equal to zero because the reservoir is without irre-
versibilities. Since Qres  Q, the last equation becomes

                                                                                        Q
                                                                          ˘S 4 res   Tb

The minus sign signals that entropy is carried out of the reservoir accompanying heat transfer.
Hence, the entropy of the reservoir decreases by an amount equal to the entropy transferred from
it to the system. However, as shown by Eq. 6.30, the entropy change of the system exceeds the
amount of entropy transferred to it because of entropy production within the system. 

   If the heat transfer were oppositely directed in the above example, passing instead from
the system to the reservoir, the magnitude of the entropy transfer would remain the same,
but its direction would be reversed. In such a case, the entropy of the system would decrease
if the amount of entropy transferred from the system to the reservoir exceeded the amount
of entropy produced within the system due to irreversibilities. Finally, observe that there is
no entropy transfer associated with work.
                                                                 6.5 Entropy Balance for Closed Systems 223

 6.5.2 Other Forms of the Entropy Balance

The entropy balance can be expressed in various forms convenient for particular analyses.
For example, if heat transfer takes place at several locations on the boundary of a system
where the temperatures do not vary with position or time, the entropy transfer term can be
expressed as a sum, so Eq. 6.27 takes the form

         S2      S1                              a    Qj      s  (6.31)
                                                      Tj
                                                   j

where QjTj is the amount of entropy transferred through the portion of the boundary at tem-
perature Tj.

   On a time rate basis, the closed system entropy rate balance is

                                                 #

             dS      a                           Qj        #                closed system entropy
             dt                                  Tj       s
                       j                                         (6.32) 

                                                                            rate balance

                                                                                              #

where dSdt is the time rate of change of entropy of the system. The term QjTj represents

the time rate of entropy transfer through the portion of the boundary whose instantaneous
                                   #

temperature is Tj. The term s accounts for the time rate of entropy production due to irre-
versibilities within the system.

   It is sometimes convenient to use the entropy balance expressed in differential form

         dS  a dQb  ds                                           (6.33)
                   Tb

Note that the differentials of the nonproperties Q and  are shown, respectively, as Q and .
When there are no internal irreversibilities,  vanishes and Eq. 6.33 reduces to Eq. 6.4b.

 6.5.3 Evaluating Entropy Production and Transfer

Regardless of the form taken by the entropy balance, the objective in many applications is

to evaluate the entropy production term. However, the value of the entropy production for a

given process of a system often does not have much significance by itself. The significance

is normally determined through comparison. For example, the entropy production within a

given component might be compared to the entropy production values of the other compo-

nents included in an overall system formed by these components. By comparing entropy pro-

duction values, the components where appreciable irreversibilities occur can be identified

and rank ordered. This allows attention to be focused on the components that contribute most

to inefficient operation of the overall system.

   To evaluate the entropy transfer term of the entropy balance requires information re-               Boundary of
garding both the heat transfer and the temperature on the boundary where the heat transfer             enlarged system
occurs. The entropy transfer term is not always subject to direct evaluation, however, be-
cause the required information is either unknown or not defined, such as when the system                     Temperature
passes through states sufficiently far from equilibrium. In such applications, it may be con-    T > Tf variation

venient, therefore, to enlarge the system to include enough of the immediate surroundings

that the temperature on the boundary of the enlarged system corresponds to the tempera-

ture of the surroundings away from the immediate vicinity of the system, Tf. The entropy                                  Tf
transfer term is then simply QTf. However, as the irreversibilities present would not be just

for the system of interest but for the enlarged system, the entropy production term would

account for the effects of internal irreversibilities within the original system and external

irreversibilities present within that portion of the surroundings included within the enlarged

system.
224 Chapter 6 Using Entropy

                                 6.5.4 Illustrations

                                The following examples illustrate the use of the energy and entropy balances for the analy-
                                sis of closed systems. Property relations and property diagrams also contribute significantly
                                in developing solutions. The first example reconsiders the system and end states of Exam-
                                ple 6.1 to demonstrate that entropy is produced when internal irreversibilities are present and
                                that the amount of entropy production is not a property.

  E X A M P L E 6 . 2 Irreversible Process of Water

  Water initially a saturated liquid at 100C is contained within a piston­cylinder assembly. The water undergoes a process to
  the corresponding saturated vapor state, during which the piston moves freely in the cylinder. There is no heat transfer with
  the surroundings. If the change of state is brought about by the action of a paddle wheel, determine the net work per unit
  mass, in kJ/kg, and the amount of entropy produced per unit mass, in kJ/kg # K.

  SOLUTION

  Known: Water contained in a piston­cylinder assembly undergoes an adiabatic process from saturated liquid to saturated
  vapor at 100C. During the process, the piston moves freely, and the water is rapidly stirred by a paddle wheel.
  Find: Determine the net work per unit mass and the entropy produced per unit mass.

  Schematic and Given Data:

  p                         T

     f            g

                        100°C f            g                                 System
                                                                             boundary
         Area is                                             Water
        not work
                     100°C       Area is
                                 not heat

                     v                        s

                                                                                        Figure E6.2

  Assumptions:

  1. The water in the piston­cylinder assembly is a closed system.
  2. There is no heat transfer with the surroundings.
  3. The system is at an equilibrium state initially and finally. There is no change in kinetic or potential energy between these
  two states.

  Analysis: As the volume of the system increases during the process, there is an energy transfer by work from the system
  during the expansion, as well as an energy transfer by work to the system via the paddle wheel. The net work can be evalu-
  ated from an energy balance, which reduces with assumptions 2 and 3 to

                                                          0       0       0
                                           ˘U  ˘KE  ˘PE  Q  W

  On a unit mass basis, the energy balance reduces to

                                                       W     1ug     uf2
                                                       m
                                                                             6.5 Entropy Balance for Closed Systems 225

  With specific internal energy values from Table A-2 at 100C

  W  2087.56 kJ
  m                                                                      kg

  The minus sign indicates that the work input by stirring is greater in magnitude than the work done by the water as it
  expands.

      The amount of entropy produced is evaluated by applying an entropy balance. Since there is no heat transfer, the term
  accounting for entropy transfer vanishes

                                                                                                                                     0

                                  ˘S  2 adQb  s
                                                                           1 Tb

  On a unit mass basis, this becomes on rearrangement

                                                       s       sg    sf
                                                       m

  With specific entropy values from Table A-2 at 100C

  s                                                                kJ
  m                                                       6.048 kg # K

   Although each end state is an equilibrium state at the same pressure and temperature, the pressure and temperature are not

      necessarily uniform throughout the system at intervening states, nor are they necessarily constant in value during the
      process. Accordingly, there is no well-defined "path" for the process. This is emphasized by the use of dashed lines to
      represent the process on these p­v and T­s diagrams. The dashed lines indicate only that a process has taken place, and
      no "area" should be associated with them. In particular, note that the process is adiabatic, so the "area" below the dashed
      line on the T­s diagram can have no significance as heat transfer. Similarly, the work cannot be associated with an area
      on the p­v diagram.

   The change of state is the same in the present example as in Example 6.1. However, in Example 6.1 the change of state

      is brought about by heat transfer while the system undergoes an internally reversible process. Accordingly, the value of
      entropy production for the process of Example 6.1 is zero. Here, fluid friction is present during the process and the en-
      tropy production is positive in value. Accordingly, different values of entropy production are obtained for two processes
      between the same end states. This demonstrates that entropy production is not a property.

   As an illustration of second law reasoning, the next example uses the fact that the entropy
production term of the entropy balance cannot be negative.

  E X A M P L E 6 . 3 Evaluating Minimum Theoretical Compression Work

  Refrigerant 134a is compressed adiabatically in a piston­cylinder assembly from saturated vapor at 0C to a final pressure of
  0.7 MPa. Determine the minimum theoretical work input required per unit mass of refrigerant, in kJ/kg.

  SOLUTION
  Known: Refrigerant 134a is compressed without heat transfer from a specified initial state to a specified final pressure.
  Find: Determine the minimum theoretical work input required per unit of mass.
226 Chapter 6 Using Entropy

  Schematic and Given Data:

                             Accessible

                             states  Internal

  T                          2 energy

                              decreases
                  2s

                                  Actual                                                                   Insulation
                                  compression
      Internally
      reversible             1
     compression

                                                                             R-134a

                                                             s                                                                 Figure E6.3
  Assumptions:

  1. The Refrigerant 134a is a closed system.
  2. There is no heat transfer with the surroundings.
  3. The initial and final states are equilibrium states. There is no change in kinetic or potential energy between these states.

  Analysis: An expression for the work can be obtained from an energy balance. By applying assumptions 2 and 3

                                                                               0         0      0
                                                                ˘U  ˘KE  ˘PE  Q  W

  When written on a unit mass basis, the work input is then

                                                                         aWb         u2     u1
                                                                             m

  The specific internal energy u1 can be obtained from Table A-10 as u1  227.06 kJ/kg. Since u1 is known, the value for the
  work input depends on the specific internal energy u2. The minimum work input corresponds to the smallest allowed value
  for u2, determined using the second law as follows.

      Applying an entropy balance

                                                                                                        0

                                                                        ˘S  2 adQb  s
                                                                                1 Tb

  where the entropy transfer term is set equal to zero because the process is adiabatic. Thus, the allowed final states must satisfy

                                                                         s2    s1    s      0
                                                                                     m

  The restriction indicated by the foregoing equation can be interpreted using the accompanying T­s diagram. Since  cannot
  be negative, states with s2  s1 are not accessible adiabatically. When irreversibilities are present during the compression, en-
  tropy is produced, so s2  s1. The state labeled 2s on the diagram would be attained in the limit as irreversibilities are reduced
  to zero. This state corresponds to an isentropic compression.

      By inspection of Table A-12, we see that when pressure is fixed, the specific internal energy decreases as temperature

  decreases. Thus, the smallest allowed value for u2 corresponds to state 2s. Interpolating in Table A-12 at 0.7 MPa, with
  s2s  s1  0.9190 kJ/kg  K, we find that u2s  244.32 kJ/kg. Finally, the minimum work input is

                             aWb                                  u2s    u1    244.32       227.06           17.26     kJ/kg
                                 m min

   The effect of irreversibilities exacts a penalty on the work input required: A greater work input is needed for the actual

      adiabatic compression process than for an internally reversible adiabatic process between the same initial state and the

      same final pressure.
                                                                                                         6.5 Entropy Balance for Closed Systems 227

   To pinpoint the relative significance of the internal and external irreversibilities, the next
example illustrates the application of the entropy rate balance to a system and to an enlarged
system consisting of the system and a portion of its immediate surroundings.

E X A M P L E 6 . 4 Pinpointing Irreversibilities

Referring to Example 2.4, evaluate the rate of entropy production s# , in kW/K, for (a) the gearbox as the system and (b) an
enlarged system consisting of the gearbox and enough of its surroundings that heat transfer occurs at the temperature of the
surroundings away from the immediate vicinity of the gearbox, Tf  293 K (20C).

SOLUTION

Known: A gearbox operates at steady state with known values for the power input through the high-speed shaft, power out-
put through the low-speed shaft, and heat transfer rate. The temperature on the outer surface of the gearbox and the temper-
ature of the surroundings away from the gearbox are also known.

Find:                                                  #
         Evaluate the entropy production rate s for each of the two specified systems shown in the schematic.

Schematic and Given Data:

             System               Q = ­1.2 kW         At this                                  Temperature
           boundary                     58.8 kW       boundary the                               variation
60 kW                                                 temperature is                             Tb
                                                      Tf = 293 K                                                    Tf
  Tb = 300 K                                                                                          58.8 kW
                             (a)                 60 kW
                                                                                                                               Figure E6.4
                                  Gearbox
                                                                                          (b)

Assumptions:

1. In part (a), the gearbox is taken as a closed system operating at steady state, as shown on the accompanying sketch labeled
with data from Example 2.4.

2. In part (b) the gearbox and a portion of its surroundings are taken as a closed system, as shown on the accompanying
sketch labeled with data from Example 2.4.

3. The temperature of the outer surface of the gearbox and the temperature of the surroundings are each uniform.

Analysis:

(a) To obtain an expression for the entropy production rate, begin with the entropy balance for a closed system on a time rate

basis: Eq. 6.32. Since heat transfer takes place only at temperature Tb, the entropy rate balance reduces at steady state to

                                                     0#
                                                 dS Q #

                                                      s
                                                 dt Tb

Solving

                                                         #

                                                  #      Q
                                                 s
                                                         Tb
228 Chapter 6 Using Entropy

                                                                       #
  Introducing the known values for the heat transfer rate Q and the surface temperature Tb

                              #      11.2 kW2          4       103  kW/K
                             s      1300 K2

  (b) Since heat transfer takes place at temperature Tf for the enlarged system, the entropy rate balance reduces at steady state to

                                                  0#
                                                    Q
                                   dS                       #
                                   dt Tf                    s

  Solving                                              #

                                               #       Q
                                              s
                                                       Tf

                                           #

  Introducing the known values for the heat transfer rate Q and the temperature Tf

                              #      11.2  kW2         4.1     103     kW/K
                             s      1293   K2

   The value of the entropy production rate calculated in part (a) gauges the significance of irreversibilities associated with fric-

      tion and heat transfer within the gearbox. In part (b), an additional source of irreversibility is included in the enlarged system,

      namely the irreversibility associated with the heat transfer from the outer surface of the gearbox at Tb to the surroundings at Tf.
      In this case, the irreversibilities within the gearbox are dominant, accounting for 97.6% of the total rate of entropy production.

            6.5.5 Increase of Entropy Principle

           Our study of the second law began in Sec. 5.1 with a discussion of the directionality of
           processes. In the present development, it is shown that the energy and entropy balances can
           be used together to determine direction.

              The present discussion centers on an enlarged system comprising a system and that por-
           tion of the surroundings affected by the system as it undergoes a process. Since all energy
           and mass transfers taking place are included within the boundary of the enlarged system, the
           enlarged system can be regarded as an isolated system.

              An energy balance for the isolated system reduces to

                                                               ˘E 4 isol  0                   (6.34a)

           because no energy transfers take place across its boundary. Thus, the energy of the isolated
           system remains constant. Since energy is an extensive property, its value for the isolated sys-
           tem is the sum of its values for the system and surroundings, respectively, so Eq. 6.34a can
           be written as

                                                       ˘E 4 system  ˘E 4 surr  0              (6.34b)

           In either of these forms, the conservation of energy principle places a constraint on the processes
           that can occur. For a process to take place, it is necessary for the energy of the system plus the
           surroundings to remain constant. However, not all processes for which this constraint is satis-
           fied can actually occur. Processes also must satisfy the second law, as discussed next.

              An entropy balance for the isolated system reduces to

                                                                                    0

                                                   ˘S 4 isol        2  a  dQ b         sisol
                                                                    1      Tb

           or

                                                               ˘S 4 isol  sisol               (6.35a)
                                                   6.5 Entropy Balance for Closed Systems 229

where isol is the total amount of entropy produced within the system and its surroundings.      increase of entropy
Since entropy is produced in all actual processes, the only processes that can occur are those  principle
for which the entropy of the isolated system increases. This is known as the increase of
entropy principle. The increase of entropy principle is sometimes considered an alternative
statement of the second law.

   Since entropy is an extensive property, its value for the isolated system is the sum of its
values for the system and surroundings, respectively, so Eq. 6.35a can be written as

                    ˘S 4 system  ˘S 4 surr  sisol  (6.35b)

Notice that this equation does not require the entropy change to be positive for both the
system and surroundings but only that the sum of the changes is positive. In either of
these forms, the increase of entropy principle dictates the direction in which any process
can proceed: the direction that causes the total entropy of the system plus surroundings
to increase.

   We noted previously the tendency of systems left to themselves to undergo processes
until a condition of equilibrium is attained (Sec. 5.1). The increase of entropy principle
suggests that the entropy of an isolated system increases as the state of equilibrium is
approached, with the equilibrium state being attained when the entropy reaches a maxi-
mum. This interpretation is considered again in Sec. 14.1, which deals with equilibrium
criteria.

   The example to follow illustrates the increase of entropy principle.

E X A M P L E 6 . 5 Quenching a Hot Metal Bar

A 0.3 kg metal bar initially at 1200K is removed from an oven and quenched by immersing it in a closed tank containing
9 kg of water initially at 300K. Each substance can be modeled as incompressible. An appropriate constant specific heat value
for the water is cw  4.2 kJ/kg  K, and an appropriate value for the metal is cm  0.42 kJ/kg  K. Heat transfer from the tank
contents can be neglected. Determine (a) the final equilibrium temperature of the metal bar and the water, in K, and (b) the
amount of entropy produced, in kJ/.

SOLUTION

Known: A hot metal bar is quenched by immersing it in a tank containing water.

Find: Determine the final equilibrium temperature of the metal bar and the water, and the amount of entropy produced.

Schematic and Given Data:

Metal bar:           System boundary   Assumptions:
                                       1. The metal bar and the water within the tank form a closed system,
Tmi = 1200°         Water:             as shown on the accompanying sketch.
cm = 0.42 kJ/kg ·   Twi = 300°K        2. There is no energy transfer by heat or work: The system is isolated.
mm = 0.3 kg         cw = 4.2 kJ/kg ·   3. There is no change in kinetic or potential energy.
                    mw = 9 kg          4. The water and metal bar are each modeled as incompressible with
                                       known specific heats.

                                        Figure E6.5
230 Chapter 6 Using Entropy

  Analysis:

  (a) The final equilibrium temperature can be evaluated from an energy balance

                                                   0             0          0       0

                                              ˘KE  ˘PE  ˘U  Q  W

  where the indicated terms vanish by assumptions 2 and 3. Since internal energy is an extensive property, its value for the over-
  all system is the sum of the values for the water and metal, respectively. Thus, the energy balance becomes

                                                 ˘Uwater  ˘Umetal  0

  Using Eq. 3.20a to evaluate the internal energy changes of the water and metal in terms of the constant specific heats

                                        mwcw1Tf  Twi2  mmcm1Tf  Tmi2  0

  where Tf is the final equilibrium temperature, and Twi and Tmi are the initial temperatures of the water and metal, respectively. Solv-
  ing for Tf and inserting values

                                   Tf         mw1cwcm2Twi           mmTmi
                                                mw1cwcm2            mm

                                              19 kg2 1102 1300°K2  10.3 kg211200°K2

                                                          19 kg2 1102  10.3 kg2

                                         303°K

  (b) The amount of entropy production can be evaluated from an entropy balance. Since no heat transfer occurs between the
  system and its surroundings, there is no accompanying entropy transfer, and an entropy balance for the system reduces to

                                                                                                                                     0

                                  ˘S  2 adQb  s
                                                                           1 Tb

  Entropy is an extensive property, so its value for the system is the sum of its values for the water and the metal, respectively,
  and the entropy balance becomes

                                                            ˘Swater  ˘Smetal  s
  Evaluating the entropy changes using Eq. 6.24 for incompressible substances, the foregoing equation can be written as

                                              s    mwcw   ln  Tf      mmcm      ln  Tf
                                                              Twi                   Tmi

  Inserting values

                    s          19  kg2  a4.2    kJ     b    303     10.3   kg2  a0.42      kJ     b     303
                                              kg # °K     ln                             kg # °K     ln

                                                            300                                        1200

                              a0.3761 kJ b  a0.1734 kJb  0.2027 kJ/°K

                                        °K                       K

   The metal bar experiences a decrease in entropy. The entropy of the water increases. In accord with the increase of en-

      tropy principle, the entropy of the isolated system increases.

   The value of  is sensitive to roundoff in the value of Tf.

                    STATISTICAL INTERPRETATION OF ENTROPY

                    In statistical thermodynamics, entropy is associated with the notion of disorder and the sec-
                    ond law statement that the entropy of an isolated system undergoing a spontaneous process
                    tends to increase is equivalent to saying that the disorder of the isolated system tends to in-
                    crease. Let us conclude the present discussion with a brief summary of concepts from the
                    microscopic viewpoint related to these ideas.
                                                                       6.6 Entropy Rate Balance for Control Volumes 231

Thermodynamics in the News...

Roll Over Boltzmann                                             no new fundamental               RIP
                                                                understanding.                 S = k ln w
Physicist Constantino Tsallis has proposed a new statistical
definition of entropy some say will shake the foundations of      The new statistical
science as we know it. The Boltzmann relation, providing the
link between the microscopic interpretation of entropy and ob-  definition reduces to
servations of macroscopic system behavior for over a century,
is being called into question. Scientists are weighing in on    the Boltzmann rela-
whether the theory provides new fundamental understanding
or simply amplifies our thinking.                               tion for systems at

    Supporters of the new definition of entropy say it extends  equilibrium. But for
the scope of statistical thermodynamics to new and exciting
classes of problems. They claim it fills a gap in theory first  systems at states far
noted by Einstein and allows researchers to explain phenom-
ena ranging from the movement of microorganisms to the mo-      from equilibrium the
tions of stars, and even swings in the stock market. Skeptics
believe that it only provides an empirical "fudge" factor with  new definition shines, say its supporters. The theory uses the

                                                                mathematical notion of fractals to account for nonequilibrium

                                                                behavior and describes systems on the verge of chaos by new

                                                                statistical descriptions. Time will tell whether the new defini-

                                                                tion is accepted as the basis of statistical mechanics, or takes

                                                                its place on a long list of bright ideas that fell by the wayside

                                                                of science.

   Viewed macroscopically, an equilibrium state of a system appears to be unchanging, but
on the microscopic level the particles making up the matter are continually in motion. Ac-
cordingly, a vast number of possible microscopic states correspond to any given macroscopic
equilibrium state. The total number of possible microscopic states available to a system is
called the thermodynamic probability, w. Entropy is related to w by the Boltzmann relation

                    S  k ln w                                                          (6.36)

where k is Boltzmann's constant. From this equation we see that any process that increases
the number of possible microscopic states of a system increases its entropy, and conversely.
Hence, for an isolated system, processes only occur in such a way that the number of mi-
croscopic states available to the system increases. The number w is referred to as the diso-
rder of the system. We can say, then, that the only processes an isolated system can undergo
are those that increase the disorder of the system.

6.6 Entropy Rate Balance for
         Control Volumes

Thus far the discussion of the entropy balance concept has been restricted to the case of
closed systems. In the present section the entropy balance is extended to control volumes.

    Like mass and energy, entropy is an extensive property, so it too can be transferred into
or out of a control volume by streams of matter. Since this is the principal difference be-
tween the closed system and control volume forms, the control volume entropy rate balance
can be obtained by modifying Eq. 6.32 to account for these entropy transfers. The result
is

                #

dScv       a    Qj    a     #      a     #                         #                   (6.37)
 dt             Tj         misi         mese                      scv
             j          j            e                                                        control volume entropy

rate of               rates of                                    rate of                         rate balance

entropy               entropy                                   entropy

change                transfer                                  production
232 Chapter 6 Using Entropy

                        where  dScv#dt  represents   the  time  rate       of  change  of  entropy  within  the  control   volume.
                                               #
entropy transfer        The terms misi and me se account, respectively, for rates of entr#opy transfer accompany-
accompanying mass flow
                        ing mass flow into and out of the control volume. The term Qj represents the time rate

                        of   heat  transfe# r at  the location  on the boundary where the instantaneous temperature is
                        Tj.  The                  accounts for                                                                       #
                                   ratio QjTj
                                                                the accompanying rate of entropy transfer. The term scv

                        denotes the time rate of entropy production due to irreversibilities within the control

                        volume.

                        INTEGRAL FORM

                        As for the cases of the control volume mass and energy rate balances, the entropy rate bal-
                        ance can be expressed in terms of local properties to obtain forms that are more generally
                        applicable. Thus, the term Scv(t), representing the total entropy associated with the control
                        volume at time t, can be written as a volume integral

                                               Scv1t2  rs dV
                                                                                                                V

                        where  and s denote, respectively, the local density and specific entropy. The rate of entropy
                        transfer accompanying heat transfer can be expressed more generally as an integral over the
                        surface of the control volume

                                                      time rate of entropy                 #
                                                                                           q
                                                     Ł transfer accompanying §  a b dA
                                                                                           A Tb
                                                          heat transfer

                                #
                        where q is the heat flux, the time rate of heat transfer per unit of surface area, through the
                        location on the boundary where the instantaneous temperature is T. The subscript "b" is added
                        as a reminder that the integrand is evaluated on the boundary of the control volume. In ad-
                        dition, the terms accounting for entropy transfer accompanying mass flow can be expressed
                        as integrals over the inlet and exit flow areas, resulting in the following form of the entropy
                        rate balance

                                                  #
                                                      q
                                                    a b dA 
                                                  A Tb
                                 d                                   a                         a                       #
                                                                                                                      scv
                             dt
                                 rs dV                          a             srVn dAb     a           srVn dAb            (6.38)

                               V                                  i        A           i    e       A            e

                        where Vn denotes the normal component in the direction of flow of the velocity relative to
                        the flow area. In some cases, it is also convenient to express the entropy production rate as
                        a volume integral of the local volumetric rate of entropy production within the control vol-
                        ume. The study of Eq. 6.38 brings out the assumptions underlying Eq. 6.37. Finally, note
                        that for a closed system the sums accounting for entropy transfer at inlets and exits drop
                        out, and Eq. 6.38 reduces to give a more general form of Eq. 6.32.

                         6.6.1 Analyzing Control Volumes at Steady State

                        Since a great many engineering analyses involve control volumes at steady state, it is in-
                        structive to list steady-state forms of the balances developed for mass, energy, and entropy.
                        At steady state, the conservation of mass principle takes the form

                                                                     a         #    a   #                                  (4.27)
                                                                              mi       me

                                                                        i           e
                                                                                   6.6 Entropy Rate Balance for Control Volumes 233

The energy rate balance at steady state is

0     #      #      a      #  ahi           Vi2            gzib      a    #   ahe    V2e    gzeb  (4.28a)
     Qcv    Wcv           mi                2                            me          2

                       i                                             e

Finally, the steady-state form of the entropy rate balance is obtained by reducing Eq. 6.37
to give

                              #                                                                              steady-state entropy

                 0     a    Qj           a       #            a     #          #                  (6.39)  rate balance
                            Tj                  misi               mese       scv
                         j                 i                    e

These equations often must be solved simultaneously, together with appropriate property
relations.

   Mass and energy are conserved quantities, but entropy is not conserved. Equation 4.27 in-
dicates that at steady state the total rate of mass flow into the control volume equals the total
rate of mass flow out of the control volume. Similarly, Eq. 4.28a indicates that the total rate
of energy transfer into the control volume equals the total rate of energy transfer out of the
control volume. However, Eq. 6.39 requires that the rate at which entropy is transferred out
must exceed the rate at which entropy enters, the difference being the rate of entropy pro-
duction within the control volume owing to irreversibilities.

ONE-INLET, ONE-EXIT CONTROL VOLUMES

Since many applications involve one-inlet, one-exit control volumes at steady state, let us
also list the form of the entropy rate balance for this important case:

                                     #

                    0       a        Qj          #  1  s1     s22         #
                                     Tj         m                        scv
                              j

                                                #
Or, on dividing by the mass flow rate m and rearranging

                      s2         s1         1   a   a       #         #                           (6.40)
                                             #             Qj b
                                            m         j    Tj        scv
                                                                      #
                                                                     m

The two terms on the right side of Eq. 6.40 denote, respectively, the rate of entropy trans-
fer accompanying heat transfer and the rate of entropy production within the control vol-
ume, each per unit of mass flowing through the control volume. From Eq. 6.40 it can be
concluded that the entropy of a unit of mass passing from inlet to exit can increase, de-
crease, or remain the same. Furthermore, because the value of the second term on the
right can never be negative, a decrease in the specific entropy from inlet to exit can be
realized only when more entropy is transferred out of the control volume accompanying
heat transfer than is produced by irreversibilities within the control volume. When the
value of this entropy transfer term is positive, the specific entropy at the exit is greater
than the specific entropy at the inlet whether internal irreversibilities are present or not.
In the special case where there is no entropy transfer accompanying heat transfer, Eq. 6.40
reduces to

                                                           #

                                     s2         s1         scv                                    (6.41)
                                                            #
                                                           m
234 Chapter 6 Using Entropy

                                Accordingly, when irreversibilities are present within the control volume, the entropy of a
                                unit of mass increases as it passes from inlet to exit. In the limiting case in which no irre-
                                versibilities are present, the unit mass passes through the control volume with no change in
                                its entropy--that is, isentropically.

                                 6.6.2 Illustrations

                                The following examples illustrate the use of the mass, energy, and entropy balances for the
                                analysis of control volumes at steady state. Carefully note that property relations and prop-
                                erty diagrams also play important roles in arriving at solutions.

                                    In the first example, we evaluate the rate of entropy production within a turbine operat-
                                ing at steady state when there is heat transfer from the turbine.

E X A M P L E 6 . 6 Entropy Production in a Steam Turbine

Steam enters a turbine with a pressure of 30 bar, a temperature of 400C, and a velocity of 160 m /s. Saturated vapor at 100C
exits with a velocity of 100 m /s. At steady state, the turbine develops work equal to 540 kJ per kg of steam flowing through
the turbine. Heat transfer between the turbine and its surroundings occurs at an average outer surface temperature of 350 K.
Determine the rate at which entropy is produced within the turbine per kg of steam flowing, in kJ/kg # K. Neglect the change
in potential energy between inlet and exit.

SOLUTION

Known: Steam expands through a turbine at steady state for which data are provided.

Find: Determine the rate of entropy production per kg of steam flowing.

Schematic and Given Data:

                                                                                   30 bar

                                                        T                          1 400°C

p1 = 30 bar     W­­c­v  =  540  kJ/kg
T1 = 400°C       m
V1 = 160 m/s 1

                                                    100°C                                  2

                           T2 = 100°C                                                                  s
                                                                                                                Figure E6.6
Tb = 350 K      2          Saturated vapor

                           V2 = 100 m/s

Assumptions:

1. The control volume shown on the accompanying sketch is at steady state.
2. Heat transfer from the turbine to the surroundings occurs at a specified average outer surface temperature.
3. The change in potential energy between inlet and exit can be neglected.

Analysis: To determine the entropy production per unit mass flowing through the turbine, begin with mass and entropy rate

balances for the one-inlet, one-exit control volume at steady state:

                                       0     #       #
                                            m1      m2
                                                 #

                                       0    a    Qj      #             #       #
                                                 Tj     m1s1          m2s2    scv
                                              j
                                                                                            6.6 Entropy Rate Balance for Control Volumes 235

                                                                                                                                                   #

  Since heat transfer occurs only at Tb  350 K, the first term on the right side of the entropy rate balance reduces to QcvTb.

  Combining the mass and entropy rate balances

                                                                     #

                                                            0      Qcv      m# 1s1     s22     #
                                                                   Tb                         scv

  where   #  is  the  mass  flow  rate.  Solving  for  s# cvm#
         m

                                                             #          Q# cvm#        1s2    s12
                                                            scv
                                                                             Tb
                                                             #
                                                            m

  The heat transfer rate, Q# cvm# , required by this expression is evaluated next.

      Reduction of the mass and energy rate balances results in

                                                       #        #                           a V22     V12 b

                                                       Qcv      Wcv       1h2    h12               
                                                         #        #                                2
                                                       m         m

  where the potential energy change from inlet to exit is dropped by assumption 3. From Table A-4 at 30 bar, 400C, h1 
  3230.9 kJ/kg, and from Table A-2, h2  hg(100C)  2676.1 kJ/kg. Thus

                      #                                                        110022       116022
                                                                                       2            d
                 Qcv             kJ      12676.1       3230.92 a kJ b       c                          a  m2  b  `  1    1N    /s2  `  `     1 kJ  m  `
                   #        540                                   kg                                      s2           kg # m             103 N #
                 m
                                 kg

                          540  554.8  7.8  22.6 kJ/kg

      From Table A-2, s2  7.3549 kJ/kg # K, and from Table A-4, s1  6.9212 kJ/kg # K. Inserting values into the expression
  for entropy production

                                          #         122.6 kJ/ kg2              17.3549        6.92122     a    kJ      b
                                         scv                                                                 kg # K

                                          #              350 K
                                         m

                                               0.0646  0.4337  0.4983 kJ/kg # K

   If the boundary were located to include a portion of the immediate surroundings so heat transfer would take place at the

      temperature of the surroundings, say Tf  293 K, the entropy production for the enlarged control volume would be
      0.511 kJ/kg # K. It is left as an exercise to verify this value and to explain why the entropy production for the enlarged

      control volume would be greater than for a control volume consisting of the turbine only.

   In Example 6.7, the mass, energy, and entropy rate balances are used to evaluate a per-
formance claim for a device to produce hot and cold streams of air from a single stream of
air at an intermediate temperature.

    E X A M P L E 6 . 7 Evaluating a Performance Claim

    An inventor claims to have developed a device requiring no energy transfer by work or heat transfer, yet able to produce hot
    and cold streams of air from a single stream of air at an intermediate temperature. The inventor provides steady-state test data
    indicating that when air enters at a temperature of 39C and a pressure of 5.0 bars, separate streams of air exit at temperatures
    of 18C and 79C, respectively, and each at a pressure of 1 bar. Sixty percent of the mass entering the device exits at the lower
    temperature. Evaluate the inventor's claim, employing the ideal gas model for air and ignoring changes in the kinetic and po-
    tential energies of the streams from inlet to exit.
236 Chapter 6 Using Entropy

  SOLUTION
  Known: Data are provided for a device that at steady state produces hot and cold streams of air from a single stream of air
  at an intermediate temperature without energy transfers by work or heat.
  Find: Evaluate whether the device can operate as claimed.
  Schematic and Given Data:

                                                     1  T1 = 21°C
                                                        p1 = 5.1 bars

         2                             Inlet

  T2 = 79°C
  p2 = 1 bar

              Hot outlet

                                                                                       3

                                                                      Cold outlet T3 = 18°C
                                                                                       p3 = 1 bar

                                                                                                             Figure E6.7

  Assumptions:

  1. The control volume shown on the accompanying sketch is at steady state.

                              #                   #

  2. For the control volume, Wcv  0 and Qcv  0.

  3. Changes in the kinetic and potential energies from inlet to exit can be ignored.

 4. The air is modeled as an ideal gas with constant cp  1.0 kJ/kg # K.

  Analysis: For the device to operate as claimed, the conservation of mass and energy principles must be satisfied. The sec-
  ond law of thermodynamics also must be satisfied; and in particular the rate of entropy production cannot be negative. Ac-
  cordingly, the mass, energy and entropy rate balances are considered in turn.

      With assumptions 1­3, the mass and energy rate balances reduce, respectively, to

                                                                 #       #         #
                                                                m1      m2        m3

                                                                   0     #             #          #
                                                                        m1h1          m2h2       m3h3

  Since   #         #     it  follows  from  the  mass  rate       balance      that      #        #   By   combining  the  mass  and  energy  rate  balances
         m3     0.6m1,                                                                   m2    0.4m1.

  and evaluating changes in specific enthalpy using constant cp, the energy rate balance is also satisfied. That is

                                             0          1m# 2         m# 32 h1     #            #
                                                                                  m2h2         m3h3

                                                         #  1  h1      h22         #  1  h1    h32
                                                        m2                        m3

                                                   0.4m# 1cp1T1  T22  0.6m# 1cp1T1  T32

                                                   0.411052  0.61702

                                                  0

  Accordingly, with the given data the conservation of mass and energy principles are satisfied.
      Since no significant heat transfer occurs, the entropy rate balance at steady state reads

                                                                   #0

                                                  0a               Qj        #            #          #       #
                                                                   Tj       m1s1         m2s2       m3s3    scv
                                                             j
                                                                                         6.6 Entropy Rate Balance for Control Volumes 237

  Combining the mass and entropy rate balances

           0         1   #                              #  2  s1      #            #          #
                        m2                             m3            m2s2         m3s3       scv

                      #                         1  s1    s22          #  1  s1    s32         #
                     m2                                              m3                      scv

                     0.4m# 11s1                               s22        0.6m# 11s1          s32     #
                                                                                                    scv

  Solving for s# cvm# 1 and using Eq. 6.23 to evaluate changes in specific entropy

  #                                             T2       R ln p2 d                           T3     R ln p3 d
                                                T1            p1                             T1          p1
  scv    0.4  c  cp  ln                                                     0.6   c  cp  ln       
   #
  m1

         0.4  c  a1.0                             kJ     b    ln  352     a 8.314          kJ       b  ln   1     d
                                                kg # K            294         28.97      kg # °K           5.0

           0.6   c   a1.0                                kJ       b  ln  255      a 8.314          kJ      b  ln   1   d
                                                       kg # °K           294       28.97         kg # °K          5.0

        0.454 kJ/kg # °K

     Thus, the second law of thermodynamics is also satisfied.

 On the basis of this evaluation, the inventor's claim does not violate principles of thermodynamics.

   Since the specific heat cp of air varies little over the temperature interval from 0 to 79C, cp can be taken as constant.

      From Table A-20, cp  1.0 kJ /kg # K.

   Since temperature differences are involved in this calculation, the temperatures can be either in C or K.
   In this calculation involving temperature ratios, the temperatures must be in K.
   If the value of the rate of entropy production had been negative or zero, the claim would be rejected. A negative value is

      impossible by the second law and a zero value would indicate operation without irreversibilities.

   Such devices do exist. They are known as vortex tubes and are used in industry for spot cooling.

   In Example 6.8, we evaluate and compare the rates of entropy production for three com-
ponents of a heat pump system. Heat pumps are considered in detail in Chap. 10.

    E X A M P L E 6 . 8 Entropy Production in Heat Pump Components

    Components of a heat pump for supplying heated air to a dwelling are shown in the schematic below. At steady state,
    Refrigerant 22 enters the compressor at 5C, 3.5 bar and is compressed adiabatically to 75C, 14 bar. From the com-
    pressor, the refrigerant passes through the condenser, where it condenses to liquid at 28C, 14 bar. The refrigerant then
    expands through a throttling valve to 3.5 bar. The states of the refrigerant are shown on the accompanying T­s diagram.
    Return air from the dwelling enters the condenser at 20C, 1 bar with a volumetric flow rate of 0.42 m3/s and exits at
    50C with a negligible change in pressure. Using the ideal gas model for the air and neglecting kinetic and potential en-
    ergy effects, (a) determine the rates of entropy production, in kW/K, for control volumes enclosing the condenser,
    compressor, and expansion valve, respectively. (b) Discuss the sources of irreversibility in the components considered in
    part (a).

    SOLUTION

    Known: Refrigerant 22 is compressed adiabatically, condensed by heat transfer to air passing through a heat exchanger, and
    then expanded through a throttling valve. Steady-state operating data are known.

    Find: Determine the entropy production rates for control volumes enclosing the condenser, compressor, and expansion valve,
    respectively, and discuss the sources of irreversibility in these components.
238 Chapter 6 Using Entropy

Schematic and Given Data:

Indoor return air                    Supply air

T5 = 20°C          5              6  T6 = 50°C
p5 = 1 bar                           p6 = 1 bar
(AV)5 = 0.42 m3/s
                                                                  T

3                     Condenser 2     p2 = 14 bar                                                                       75°C
p3 = 14 bar            Compressor     T2 = 75°C                                                                    2
T3 = 28°C                                                                                                       1 ­5°C
                                                                                       14 bar
Expansion                                                                     3 28°C
valve
                                                                                         3.5 bar
p4 = 3.5 bar                               T1 = ­5°C                                 4
4                                     1 p1 = 3.5 bar

                                      Outdoor air                                                               s
                                                                                                                                  Figure E6.8
                      Evaporator

Assumptions:

1. Each component is analyzed as a control volume at steady state.

2. The compressor operates adiabatically, and the expansion across the valve is a throttling process.

                                                            #                 #

3. For the control volume enclosing the condenser, Wcv  0 and Qcv  0.

4. Kinetic and potential energy effects can be neglected.

 5. The air is modeled as an ideal gas with constant cp  1.005 kJ/kg # K.

Analysis:

(a) Let us begin by obtaining property data at each of the principal refrigerant states located on the accompanying schematic and

T­s diagram. At the inlet to the compressor, the refrigerant is a superheated vapor at 5C, 3.5 bar, so from Table A-9,
s1  0.9572 kJ/kg # K. Similarly, at state 2, the refrigerant is a superheated vapor at 75C, 14 bar, so interpolating in Table A-9
gives s2  0.98225 kJ/kg # K and h2  294.17 kJ/kg.

    State 3 is compressed liquid at 28C, 14 bar. From Table A-7, s3  sf(28C)  0.2936 kJ/kg # K and h3  hf(28C)  79.05 kJ/kg.
The expansion through the valve is a throttling process, so h3  h4. Using data from Table A-8, the quality at state 4 is

                                         x4      1h4  hf42             179.05  33.092            0.216
                                                   1hfg24                  1212.912

and the specific entropy is

                      s4  sf4  x41sg4  sf42  0.1328  0.21610.9431  0.13282  0.3078 kJ/kg # K

Condenser.

Consider the control volume enclosing the condenser. With assumptions 1 and 3, the entropy rate balance reduces to

                                          0       #    1s2        s32     m# air1s5    s62        #
                                                 mref                                            scond

              #                                        #               #
To evaluate scond requires the two mass flow rates, mair and mref, and the change in specific entropy for the air. These are ob-

tained next.

Evaluating the mass flow rate of air using the ideal gas model (assumption 5)

                       #       1AV25     1AV25    p5
                      mair       v5              RT5

                              a0.42 m3 b            11 bar2                   ` 105 N/m2 `    `     1 kJ     `   0.5 kg/s
                                                                                 1 bar           103 N #
                                      s   a  8.314    kJ       b  1293    K2                              m
                                             28.97  kg # K
                                                                                                       6.6 Entropy Rate Balance for Control Volumes 239

  The refrigerant mass flow rate is determined using an energy balance for the control volume enclosing the condenser together
  with assumptions 1, 3, and 4 to obtain

                                                                                    mair 1h6  h52#
                                                                                      1h2  h32
                                                                     #        
                                                                    mref

  With assumption 5, h6  h5  cp(T6  T5). Inserting values

                                                 a0.5    kg   b a1.005           kJ         b  1323         2932K
                                                                         kg               K
                        #                                s                          #

                       mref                                   1294 .17  79 .052 kJ/kg                                0.07 kg/s

  Using Eq. 6.23, the change in specific entropy of the air is

               s6       s5                    cp     ln T6       R  ln p6
                                                       T5             p5

                                                                                                                 0

                                              a1.005          kJ    b     ln  a  323      b         R  lna1.0 b      0.098   kJ/kg         #  K
                                                            kg # K               293                       1.0

                                                    #
  Finally, solving the entropy balance for scond and inserting values

                #           #              1  s3     s22          #    1  s6        s52
               scond       mref                                  mair

                           c  a0.07                  kg  b  10.2936           0.982252                kJ       10.52 10.0982 d             ` 1 kW `
                                                     s                                              kg # K                                 1 kJ/s

                       7.95  104 kW
                                          K

  Compressor.

  For the control volume enclosing the compressor, the entropy rate balance reduces with assumptions 1 and 3 to

                                                                 0      #        1  s1       s22        #
                                                                       mref                            scomp

  or

                         #                            #     1s2     s12
                        scomp                        mref

                                                            kg      10.98225                   0.95722      a    kJ    b  `  1 kW    `
                                                     a0.07 b                                                   kg # K        1 kJ/s

                                                             s

                                                  17.5  104 kW/K

  Valve.

  Finally, for the control volume enclosing the throttling valve, the entropy rate balance reduces to

                                                                 0      #        1s3           s42      #
                                                                       mref                            svalve

                 #
  Solving for svalve and inserting values

                #           #                 1  s4      s32               kg             10.3078           0.29362  a    kJ    b       `  1 kW    `
               svalve      mref                                     a0.07 b                                             kg # K             1 kJ/s

                                                                            s

                        9.94  104 kW/K

  (b) The following table summarizes, in rank order, the calculated entropy production rates:

                                                         Component                                  . cv (kW/ K)

                                                         compressor                                 17.5  104
                                                         valve                                      9.94  104

                                                         condenser                                  7.95  104
240 Chapter 6 Using Entropy

Entropy production in the compressor is due to fluid friction, mechanical friction of the moving parts, and internal heat trans-
fer. For the valve, the irreversibility is primarily due to fluid friction accompanying the expansion across the valve. The prin-
cipal source of irreversibility in the condenser is the temperature difference between the air and refrigerant streams. In this
example, there are no pressure drops for either stream passing through the condenser, but slight pressure drops due to fluid
friction would normally contribute to the irreversibility of condensers. The evaporator lightly shown in Fig. E6.8 has not been
analyzed.

 Due to the relatively small temperature change of the air, the specific heat cp can be taken as constant at the average of

  the inlet and exit air temperatures.

  Temperatures  in  K  are  used  to  evaluate   #     but  since  a  temperature  difference  is  involved  the  same  result  would  be  ob-
                                                mref,

  tained if temperatures in C were used. Temperatures in K must be used when a temperature ratio is involved, as in Eq. 6.23

  used to evaluate s6  s5.

 By focusing attention on reducing irreversibilities at the sites with the highest entropy production rates, thermodynamic

  improvements may be possible. However, costs and other constraints must be considered, and can be overriding.

                       6.7 Isentropic Processes

                       The term isentropic means constant entropy. Isentropic processes are encountered in many
                       subsequent discussions. The object of the present section is to explain how properties are re-
                       lated at any two states of a process in which there is no change in specific entropy.

                             6.7.1 General Considerations

                            The properties at states having the same specific entropy can be related using the graphical
                            and tabular property data discussed in Sec. 6.3.1. For example, as illustrated by Fig. 6.9, tem-
                            perature­entropy and enthalpy­entropy diagrams are particularly convenient for determining
                            properties at states having the same value of specific entropy. All states on a vertical line
                            passing through a given state have the same entropy. If state 1 on Fig. 6.9 is fixed by pres-
                            sure p1 and temperature T1, states 2 and 3 are readily located once one additional property,
                            such as pressure or temperature, is specified. The values of several other properties at states
                            2 and 3 can then be read directly from the figures.

                               Tabular data also can be used to relate two states having the same specific entropy. For
                            the case shown in Fig. 6.9, the specific entropy at state 1 could be determined from the
                            superheated vapor table. Then, with s2  s1 and one other property value, such as p2 or T2,

                            T                               p1             h                       p1

                                                       1                                           1 T1
                                                           T1

                                                            p2                                         p2 p3
                                                          2 T2                                     2 T2

                                                                  p3                                                T3
                                                       3
                                                                                                      3
                                                                    T3

                                                                        s                                               s

                             Figure 6.9 T­s and h­s diagrams showing states having the same value of
                            specific entropy.
                                                                                                                               6.7 Isentropic Processes 241

state 2 could be located in the superheated vapor table. The values of the properties v, u, and
h at state 2 can then be read from the table. An illustration of this procedure is given in Sec.
6.3.1. Note that state 3 falls in the two-phase liquid­vapor regions of Fig. 6.9. Since s3  s1,
the quality at state 3 could be determined using Eq. 6.6. With the quality known, other prop-
erties such as v, u, and h could then be evaluated. Computer retrieval of entropy data pro-
vides an alternative to tabular data.

 6.7.2 Using the Ideal Gas Model                                                                                         v2
                                                                                                                           p2
Figure 6.10 shows two states of an ideal gas having the same value of specific entropy. Let T
us consider relations among pressure, specific volume, and temperature at these states, first                      2
using the ideal gas tables and then assuming specific heats are constant.                                                   T2

IDEAL GAS TABLES

For two states having the same specific entropy, Eq. 6.21a reduces to                                                                     v1
                                                                                                                                            p1
                  0    s°1T22     s°1T12     R   ln  p2                (6.42a)
                                                     p1                                                                            1
                                                                                                                                             T1
Equation 6.42a involves four property values: p1, T1, p2, and T2. If any three are known, the
fourth can be determined. If, for example, the temperature at state 1 and the pressure ratio                                                         s
p2p1 are known, the temperature at state 2 can be determined from                                                   Figure 6.10 Two
                                                                                                                   states of an ideal gas
                      s°1T22    s°1T12    R  ln  p2                    (6.42b)                                     where s2  s1.
                                                 p1

Since T1 is known, s(T1) would be obtained from the appropriate table, the value of s(T2 )
would be calculated, and temperature T2 would then be determined by interpolation. If p1,
T1, and T2 are specified and the pressure at state 2 is the unknown, Eq. 6.42a would be solved
to obtain

                  p2    p1 exp c  s°1T22     s°1T12  d                 (6.42c)
                                          R

Equations 6.42 can be used when s (or s°) data are known, as for the gases of Tables A-22
and A-23.

AIR. For the special case of air modeled as an ideal gas, Eq. 6.42c provides the basis for
an alternative tabular approach for relating the temperatures and pressures at two states having
the same specific entropy. To introduce this, rewrite the equation as

                        p2      exp 3 s°1T22R 4
                        p1      exp 3 s°1T12R 4

The quantity exp[s(T )R] appearing in this expression is solely a function of temperature,

and is given the symbol pr(T ). A tabulation of pr versus temperature for air is provided in
Tables A-22.1 In terms of the function pr, the last equation becomes

                  p2  pr2         1s1  s2, air only2                   (6.43) 
                  p1 pr1

1The values of pr determined with this definition are inconveniently large, so they are divided by a scale factor
before tabulating to give a convenient range of numbers.
242 Chapter 6 Using Entropy

                               where pr1  pr(T1) and pr2  pr(T2). The function pr is sometimes called the relative pres-
                               sure. Observe that pr is not truly a pressure, so the name relative pressure is misleading. Also,
                               be careful not to confuse pr with the reduced pressure of the compressibility diagram.

                                  A relation between specific volumes and temperatures for two states of air having the
                               same specific entropy can also be developed. With the ideal gas equation of state, v  RTp,

                               the ratio of the specific volumes is

                                                                    v2            a  RT2 b a      p1 b
                                                                    v1                p2         RT1

                               Then, since the two states have the same specific entropy, Eq. 6.43 can be introduced to give

                                           v2                                 c   RT2     d  c   pr1T12 d
                                           v1                                    pr1T22           RT1

                               The ratio RTpr(T ) appearing on the right side of the last equation is solely a function of
                               temperature, and is given the symbol vr(T ). Values of vr for air are tabulated versus tem-
                               perature in Tables A-22. In terms of the function vr, the last equation becomes

                                       v2                             vr2             1s1  s2, air only2        (6.44)
                                       v1                             vr1

METHODOLOGY                    where vr1  vr(T1) and vr2  vr(T2). The function vr is sometimes called the relative volume.
UPDATE                         Despite the name given to it, vr(T ) is not truly a volume. Also, be careful not to confuse it
                               with the pseudoreduced specific volume of the compressibility diagram.
When applying the
software IT to relate two      ASSUMING CONSTANT SPECIFIC HEATS
states of an ideal gas
having the same value of       Let us consider next how properties are related for isentropic processes of an ideal gas when
specific entropy, note that    the specific heats are constants. For any such case, Eqs. 6.22 and 6.23 reduce to the equations
IT returns specific entropy
directly and does not                                               0         cp  ln  T2        R  ln p2
employ the special                                                                    T1             p1
functions s, pr and vr.

                                                                    0         cv  ln  T2        R  ln  v2
                                                                                      T1               v1

                               Introducing the ideal gas relations

                                       cp                                 kR       ,         cv           R     (3.47)
                                                                                  1                       
                                                                       k                               k     1

                               these equations can be solved, respectively, to give

                               T2          p2                         1k   12k

                               T1      a   p1                       b                     1s1  s2, constant k2  (6.45)

                               T2          v1                         k  1
                               T1          v2
                                       a                            b                     1s1  s2, constant k2  (6.46)

                                  The following relation can be obtained by eliminating the temperature ratio from
                               Eqs. 6.45 and 6.46:

                                   p2      a                        v1     k          1s1  s2, constant k2      (6.47)
                                   p1                               v2
                                                                         b
                                                                                  6.7 Isentropic Processes 243

p                      n = ­1               T                                  n=±
                                                                                  n = ­1
                                                            n=k                      n=0

                                                                 v = constant
                               n=0                               p = constant

                 T = constant                                                  n=1

         s = constant          n=1

         n=±           n=k

                                                        v                      s
 Figure 6.11 Polytropic processes on p­v and T­s diagrams.

   From the form of Eq. 6.47, it can be concluded that a polytropic process pvk  constant
of an ideal gas with constant k is an isentropic process. We noted in Sec. 3.8 that a poly-
tropic process of an ideal gas for which n  1 is an isothermal (constant-temperature) process.
For any fluid, n  0 corresponds to an isobaric (constant-pressure) process and n  
corresponds to an isometric (constant-volume) process. Polytropic processes corresponding
to these values of n are shown in Fig. 6.11 on p­v and T­s diagrams.

   The foregoing means for evaluating data for an isentropic process of air modeled as an
ideal gas are considered in the next example.

   E X A M P L E 6 . 9 Isentropic Process of Air

   Air undergoes an isentropic process from p1  1 bar, T1  300K to a final state where the temperature is T2  650K.
   Employing the ideal gas model, determine the final pressure p2, in atm. Solve using (a) pr data from Table A-22 (b) Int-
   eractive Thermodynamics: IT, and (c) a constant specific heat ratio k evaluated at the mean temperature, 475K, from Table
   A-20.

   SOLUTION

   Known: Air undergoes an isentropic process from a state where pressure and temperature are known to a state where the
   temperature is specified.
   Find: Determine the final pressure using (a) pr data, (b) IT, and (c) a constant value for the specific heat ratio k.
   Schematic and Given Data:

   T

         p2 = ?

      2  T2 = 650 K            Assumptions:

      1  p1 = 1 bar            1. A quantity of air as the system undergoes an isentropic process.
         T1 = 300              2. The air can be modeled as an ideal gas.
                               3. In part (c) the specific heat ratio is constant.

                     s
                               Figure E6.9
244 Chapter 6 Using Entropy

  Analysis:

  (a) The pressures and temperatures at two states of an ideal gas having the same specific entropy are related by Eq. 6.43

                                                               p2  pr2
                                                               p1 pr1

  Solving

                                                            p2         p1  pr2
                                                                           pr1

  With pr values from Table A-22

                                                 p  11 bar2 21.86  15.77 bars
                                                               1.3860

  (b) The IT solution follows:

         T1 = 300 // K

 p1 = 1 // atm

         T2 = 650 // K
         s_TP("Air", T1,p1) = s_TP("Air",T2,p2)

  // Result: p2 = 15.77 bar

  (c) When the specific heat ratio k is assumed constant, the temperatures and pressures at two states of an ideal gas having
  the same specific entropy are related by Eq. 6.45. Thus

                                                                       T2   k1k    12

                                                   p2          p1   a  T1  b

  From Table A-20 at 202C (475K), k  1.39. Inserting values into the above expression

                                  p2               11 bar2  a  650   1.390.39          15.81 bar

                                                               300  b

   IT returns a value for p2 even though it is an implicit variable in the argument of the specific entropy function. Also note

      that IT returns values for specific entropy directly and does not employ special functions such as s, pr and vr.

   The close agreement between the answer obtained in part (c) and that of parts (a), (b) can be attributed to the use of an

      appropriate value for the specific heat ratio k.

                Another illustration of an isentropic process of an ideal gas is provided in the next ex-
             ample dealing with air leaking from a tank.

  E X A M P L E 6 . 1 0 Air Leaking from a Tank

  A rigid, well-insulated tank is filled initially with 5 kg of air at a pressure of 5 bar and a temperature of 500 K. A leak de-
  velops, and air slowly escapes until the pressure of the air remaining in the tank is 1 bar. Employing the ideal gas model, de-
  termine the amount of mass remaining in the tank and its temperature.

  SOLUTION
  Known: A leak develops in a rigid, insulated tank initially containing air at a known state. Air slowly escapes until the pres-
  sure in the tank is reduced to a specified value.
  Find: Determine the amount of mass remaining in the tank and its temperature.
                                                                                              6.7 Isentropic Processes 245

Schematic and Given Data:

System boundary                   Slow leak       Assumptions:

      Mass initially       Mass initially in the  1. As shown on the accompanying sketch, the closed system is the mass
     in the tank that      tank that escapes      initially in the tank that remains in the tank.
  remains in the tank                             2. There is no significant heat transfer between the system and its
                                                  surroundings.
Initial condition of tank                         3. Irreversibilities within the tank can be ignored as the air slowly
                                                  escapes.
                                                  4. The air is modeled as an ideal gas.

                                                   Figure E6.10

Analysis: With the ideal gas equation of state, the mass initially in the tank that remains in the tank at the end of the process is

                                                  m2             p2V

                                                              1RM2 T2

where p2 and T2 are the final pressure and temperature, respectively. Similarly, the initial amount of mass within the tank, m1, is

                                                  m1             p1V

                                                              1RM2 T1

where p1 and T1 are the initial pressure and temperature, respectively. Eliminating volume between these two expressions, the
mass of the system is

                                                  m2       a  p2 b  a T1 b  m1
                                                              p1     T2

     Except for the final temperature of the air remaining in the tank, T2, all required values are known. The remainder of the so-
     lution mainly concerns the evaluation of T2.

 For the closed system under consideration, there are no significant irreversibilities (assumption 3), and no heat transfer oc-

     curs (assumption 2). Accordingly, the entropy balance reduces to

                                                                    0

                                  ˘S                     2 a dQ b              0    0
                                                         1 Tb
                                                                            s

Since the system mass remains constant, S  m2 s, so

                                                           ˘s  0

That is, the initial and final states of the system have the same value of specific entropy.
    Using Eq. 6.43

                                                      pr2     a  p2 b  pr1
                                                                 p1

where p1  5 bar and p2  1 bar. With pr1  8.411 from Table A-22 at 500 K, the previous equation gives pr2  1.6822.
Using this to interpolate in Table A-22, T2  317 K.

    Finally, inserting values into the expression for system mass

                           m2    a1               bar b  a 500  Kb  15  kg2         1.58  kg
                                  5               bar     317   K

 This problem also could be solved by considering a control volume enclosing the tank. The state of the control volume

    would change with time as air escapes. The details of the analysis are left as an exercise.
246 Chapter 6 Using Entropy

        6.8 Isentropic Efficiencies of Turbines,
                                       Nozzles, Compressors, and Pumps

                                Engineers make frequent use of efficiencies and many different efficiency definitions are em-
                                ployed. In the present section isentropic efficiencies for turbines, nozzles, compressors, and
                                pumps are introduced. Isentropic efficiencies involve a comparison between the actual per-
                                formance of a device and the performance that would be achieved under idealized circum-
                                stances for the same inlet state and the same exit pressure. These efficiencies are frequently
                                used in subsequent sections of the book.

ISENTROPIC TURBINE EFFICIENCY

To introduce the isentropic turbine efficiency, refer to Fig. 6.12, which shows a turbine expan-

sion on a Mollier diagram. The state of the matter entering the turbine and the exit pressure

are fixed. Heat transfer between the turbine and its surroundings is ignored, as are kinetic and

potential energy effects. With these assumptions, the mass and energy rate balances reduce, at

steady state, to give the work developed per unit of mass flowing through the turbine

                                             #

                                            Wcv           h1      h2
                                              #
                                             m

Since state 1 is fixed, the specific enthalpy h1 is known. Accordingly, the value of the work
depends on the specific enthalpy h2 only, and increases as h2 is reduced. The maximum value
for the turbine work corresponds to the smallest allowed value for the specific enthalpy at
the turbine exit. This can be determined using the second law. Since there is no heat trans-
fer, the allowed exit states are constrained by Eq. 6.41

                                         #

                                     scv          s2          s1      0
                                      #
                                     m

Because the entropy production s# cvm# cannot be negative, states with s2  s1 are not acces-

sible in an adiabatic expansion. The only states that actually can be attained adiabatically
are those with s2  s1. The state labeled "2s" on Fig. 6.12 would be attained only in the limit
of no internal irreversibilities. This corresponds to an isentropic expansion through the tur-

bine. For fixed exit pressure, the specific enthalpy h2 decreases as the specific entropy s2

                                     p1

h                                 1      T1
               h1 ­ h2
                                       Actual
     h1 ­ h2s                        expansion

                              p2              Isentropic
                                              expansion
                                          2

                                  2s

                                            Accessible
                                               states

                                                          Figure 6.12 Comparison of actual and
                                                  s isentropic expansions through a turbine.
                                           6.8 Isentropic Efficiencies of Turbines, Nozzles, Compressors, and Pumps 247

decreases. Therefore, the smallest allowed value for h2 corresponds to state 2s, and the maxi-

mum value for the turbine work is

                                      #

                                   a  Wcv  b    h1    h2s
                                        #
                                      ms

   In an actual expansion through the turbine h2  h2s, and thus less work than the maxi-
mum would be developed. This difference can be gauged by the isentropic turbine efficiency

defined by

                                      ht      W# cvm#                                                      isentropic turbine
                                              1W# cvm# 2s
                                                                                                (6.48)  efficiency

Both the numerator and denominator of this expression are evaluated for the same inlet state
and the same exit pressure. The value of t is typically 0.7 to 0.9 (70­90%).

ISENTROPIC NOZZLE EFFICIENCY

A similar approach to that for turbines can be used to introduce the isentropic efficiency of
nozzles operating at steady state. The isentropic nozzle efficiency is defined as the ratio of

the actual specific kinetic energy of the gas leaving the nozzle, V22 2, to the kinetic energy

at the exit that would be achieved in an isentropic expansion between the same inlet state

and the same exhaust pressure, 1V22 22s

                                    hnozzle      V22  2                                         (6.49)  isentropic nozzle
                                                1V22  22s
                                                                                                           efficiency

Nozzle efficiencies of 95% or more are common, indicating that well-designed nozzles are
nearly free of internal irreversibilities.

ISENTROPIC COMPRESSOR AND PUMP EFFICIENCIES

The form of the isentropic efficiency for compressors and pumps is taken up next. Refer to
Fig. 6.13, which shows a compression process on a Mollier diagram. The state of the mat-
ter entering the compressor and the exit pressure are fixed. For negligible heat transfer with

h                                 Accessible
                                  states p2
     h2 ­ h1                       2
              h2s ­ h1
                        2s

                                         Actual
                                         compression
                                         Isentropic
                                         compression

                                         p1

                            1

                                                          Figure 6.13 Comparison of actual and
                                                    s isentropic compressions.
248 Chapter 6 Using Entropy

Thermodynamics in the News...

Star Guides Consumer Choices                                  as commercial and industrial
                                                              buildings.
Government is partnering with business and industry to iden-
tify and promote energy-efficient products. ENERGY STAR® is       Compared to the annual
a voluntary labeling program operated jointly by the US En-   energy requirements of typi-
vironmental Protection Agency and the Department of Energy    cal new equipment, ENERGY
that saved enough energy in one recent year to power 10 mil-  STAR® products save the fol-
lion homes while reducing air pollution equivalent to remov-  lowing percentages:
ing 10 million cars from the road--all without sacrificing
product features consumers want.                               household appliances: 10­50%

    The government agencies sign agreements with program       office equipment: 30­70%
partners who then can use the ENERGY STAR® logo on prod-
ucts that meet specified energy efficiency and performance     residential and commercial lighting: 70­90%
criteria. The logo now appears on many major appliances, of-
fice equipment, lighting products, and consumer electronics    consumer electronics: 20­40%
to encourage consumers to buy products that reduce energy
consumption and greenhouse gas emissions. Recently, the        residential heating and cooling equipment: 10­30%
program has been extended to cover new homes as well
                                                              By choosing ENERGY STAR® products, consumers have al-
                                                              ready saved billions on their utility bills and helped the
                                                              environment, government sources say.

                         the surroundings and no appreciable kinetic and potential energy effects, the work input per
                         unit of mass flowing through the compressor is

                                                                        #

                                                              a    Wcv     b    h2     h1
                                                                     #
                                                                        m

                         Since state 1 is fixed, the specific enthalpy h1 is known. Accordingly, the value of the work
                         input depends on the specific enthalpy at the exit, h2. The above expression shows that the
                         magnitude of the work input decreases as h2 decreases. The minimum work input corresponds
                         to the smallest allowed value for the specific enthalpy at the compressor exit. With similar
                         reasoning as for the turbine, the smallest allowed enthalpy at the exit state that would be
                         achieved in an isentropic compression from the specified inlet state to the specified exit pres-
                         sure. The minimum work input is given, therefore, by

                                                                     #

                                                              a    Wcv     b    h2s     h1
                                                                     #
                                                                     ms

                            In an actual compression, h2  h2s, and thus more work than the minimum would be re-
                         quired. This difference can be gauged by the isentropic compressor efficiency defined by

isentropic compressor                                                      1W# cvm# 2s
                                                                           1W# cvm# 2
efficiency                                                       hc                         (6.50)

isentropic pump          Both the numerator and denominator of this expression are evaluated for the same inlet state
efficiency               and the same exit pressure. The value of c is typically 75 to 85% for compressors. An
                         isentropic pump efficiency, p, is defined similarly.

                            The series of four examples to follow illustrate various aspects of isentropic efficiencies

                         of turbines, nozzles, and compressors. Example 6.11 is a direct application of the isentropic
                         turbine efficiency t to a steam turbine. Here, t is known and the objective is to determine
                         the turbine work.
                                                          6.8 Isentropic Efficiencies of Turbines, Nozzles, Compressors, and Pumps 249

  E X A M P L E 6 . 1 1 Evaluating Turbine Work Using the Isentropic Efficiency

  A steam turbine operates at steady state with inlet conditions of p1  5 bar, T1  320C. Steam leaves the turbine at a pres-
  sure of 1 bar. There is no significant heat transfer between the turbine and its surroundings, and kinetic and potential energy
  changes between inlet and exit are negligible. If the isentropic turbine efficiency is 75%, determine the work developed per
  unit mass of steam flowing through the turbine, in kJ/kg.

  SOLUTION
  Known: Steam expands through a turbine operating at steady state from a specified inlet state to a specified exit pressure.
  The turbine efficiency is known.
  Find: Determine the work developed per unit mass of steam flowing through the turbine.
  Schematic and Given Data:

                                             p1 = 5 bar

  h                                   1      T1

                 h1 ­ h2                    Actual
       h1 ­ h2s                           expansion

                                             Isentropic        Assumptions:
                                             expansion
                                                               1. A control volume enclosing the turbine is at steady state.
                                          2                    2. The expansion is adiabatic and changes in kinetic and potential
                                                               energy between the inlet and exit can be neglected.
                                      2s

                                          Accessible
                                             states

                          p2 = 1 bar

                                                         s
                                                                  Figure E6.11

  Analysis:  The work developed can be determined using the isentropic turbine efficiency, Eq. 6.48, which on rearrangement
  gives

                                                 #                #

                                                 Wcv       ht  a  Wcv  b      ht1h1    h2s2
                                                   #                #
                                                  m                m     s

      From Table A-4, h1  3105.6 kJ/kg and s1  7.5308 kJ/kg # K. The exit state for an isentropic expansion is fixed by
  p2  1 bar and s2s  s1. Interpolating with specific entropy in Table A-4 at 1 bar gives h2s  2743.0 kJ/kg. Substituting

  values

                                          #

                                          Wcv    0.7513105.6           2743.02       271.95  kJ/kg
                                            #
                                          m

   The effect of irreversibilities is to exact a penalty on the work output of the turbine. The work is only 75% of what it

      would be for an isentropic expansion between the given inlet state and the turbine exhaust pressure. This is clearly illus-

      trated in terms of enthalpy differences on the accompanying h­s diagram.

   The next example is similar to Example 6.11, but here the working substance is air as an
ideal gas. Moreover, in this case the turbine work is known and the objective is to determine
the isentropic turbine efficiency.
250 Chapter 6 Using Entropy

   E X A M P L E 6 . 1 2 Evaluating the Isentropic Turbine Efficiency

   A turbine operating at steady state receives air at a pressure of p1  3.0 bar and a temperature of T1  390 K. Air exits the
   turbine at a pressure of p2  1.0 bar. The work developed is measured as 74 kJ per kg of air flowing through the turbine.
   The turbine operates adiabatically, and changes in kinetic and potential energy between inlet and exit can be neglected. Using
   the ideal gas model for air, determine the turbine efficiency.

   SOLUTION
   Known: Air expands adiabatically through a turbine at steady state from a specified inlet state to a specified exit pressure.
   The work developed per kg of air flowing through the turbine is known.
   Find: Determine the turbine efficiency.
   Schematic and Given Data:

                                                                                     3.0 bar

                  Air                                T
                turbine
                                                                                     T1 = 390 K

                         W­­c­v  =  74  kJ/kg                                          Actual
                          m                                                          expansion
p1 = 3.0 bar
T1 = 390 K                          p2 = 1.0 bar                 Isentropic                   1.0 bar
                                                                 expansion
             1           2

                                                                                         2
                                                                               2s

                                                                                                       s
                                                                                                               Figure E6.12

Assumptions:

1. The control volume shown on the accompanying sketch is at steady state.
2. The expansion is adiabatic and changes in kinetic and potential energy between inlet and exit can be neglected.
3. The air is modeled as an ideal gas.

Analysis: The numerator of the isentropic turbine efficiency, Eq. 6.48, is known. The denominator is evaluated as
follows.

    The work developed in an isentropic expansion from the given inlet state to the specified exit pressure is

                                                     #

                                                  a  Wcv   b     h1    h2s
                                                       #
                                                     ms

From Table A-22 at 390 K, h1  390.88 kJ/kg. To determine h2s, use Eq. 6.43

                                                  pr1T2s2     a  p2 b  pr1T12
                                                                 p1

With p1  3.0 bar, p2  1.0 bar, and pr1  3.481 from Table A-22 at 390 K

                                        pr1T2s2      a 1.0 b  13.4812        1.1603
                                                      3.0
                                       6.8 Isentropic Efficiencies of Turbines, Nozzles, Compressors, and Pumps 251

Interpolation in Table A-22 gives h2s  285.27 kJ/kg. Thus

                                       #

                                   a   Wcv  b   390.88  285.27  105.6 kJ/kg
                                         #
                                       ms

Substituting values into Eq. 6.48

                                   ht     W# cvm#            74 kJ/kg         0.70  1 70 % 2
                                          1W# cvm# 2s       105.6 kJ/kg

   In the next example, the objective is to determine the isentropic efficiency of a steam
nozzle.

E X A M P L E 6 . 1 3 Evaluating the Isentropic Nozzle Efficiency

Steam enters a nozzle operating at steady state at p1  1.0 MPa and T1  320C with a velocity of 30 m/s. The pressure and
temperature at the exit are p2  0.3 MPa and T2  180C. There is no significant heat transfer between the nozzle and its sur-
roundings, and changes in potential energy between inlet and exit can be neglected. Determine the nozzle efficiency.

SOLUTION

Known: Steam expands through a nozzle at steady state from a specified inlet state to a specified exit state. The velocity at
the inlet is known.
Find: Determine the nozzle efficiency.
Schematic and Given Data:

                                                                                           1.0 MPa

                                                       h                            1         320°C

                                                                  Isentropic

p1 = 1.0 MPa                                                      expansion                   Actual
T1 = 320°C
V1 = 30 m/s              p2 = 0.3 MPa                                                         expansion
                         T2 = 180°C
                                                                                              0.3 MPa
                                    2
                 Steam                                                                             180°C
                 nozzle                                                                    2

                                                                                       2s

              1

                                                                                                         s
                                                                                                                  Figure E6.13

Assumptions:

1. The control volume shown on the accompanying sketch operates adiabatically at steady state.

                                   #
2. For the control volume, Wcv  0 and the change in potential energy between inlet and exit can be neglected.

Analysis: The nozzle efficiency given by Eq. 6.49 requires the actual specific kinetic energy at the nozzle exit and the spe-
cific kinetic energy that would be achieved at the exit in an isentropic expansion from the given inlet state to the given exit
pressure. The mass and energy rate balances for the one-inlet, one-exit control volume at steady state reduce to give

                                               V22          h1    h2     V21
                                               2                         2

This equation applies for both the actual expansion and the isentropic expansion.
252 Chapter 6 Using Entropy

      From Table A-4 at T1  320C and p1  1.0 MPa, h1  3093.9 kJ/kg, s1  7.1962 kJ /kg # K. Also, with T2  180C
  and p2  0.3 MPa, h2  2823.9 kJ/kg. Thus, the actual specific kinetic energy at the exit in kJ/kg is

              V22              (3093.9       2823.9)     kJ    13022  a  m    2  a   1  N         b  a     1 kJ     b
              2                                          kg      2                  kg  # m/            103 N #
                                                                            b                 s2
                                                                         s1                                      M

                              270.45 kJ
                                         kg

      Interpolating in Table A-4 at 0.3 MPa, with s2s  s1, results in h2s  2813.3 kJ/kg. Accordingly, the specific kinetic energy
  at the exit for an isentropic expansion is

                               a V22 b           3093.9    2813.3      302            281.05  kJ /kg
                                 2s                                   211032

     Substituting values into Eq. 6.49

                                        hnozzle    1V2222      270.45            0.962  1 96.2 % 2
                                                   1V2222s     281.05

   The principal irreversibility in nozzles is friction between the flowing gas or liquid and the nozzle wall. The effect of fric-

      tion is that a smaller exit kinetic energy, and thus a smaller exit velocity, is realized than would have been obtained in an

      isentropic expansion to the same pressure.

                 In Example 6.14, the isentropic efficiency of a refrigerant compressor is evaluated, first
              using data from property tables and then using IT.

  E X A M P L E 6 . 1 4 Evaluating the Isentropic Compressor Efficiency

  For the compressor of the heat pump system in Example 6.8, determine the power, in kW, and the isentropic efficiency using
  (a) data from property tables, (b) Interactive Thermodynamics: IT.

  SOLUTION
  Known: Refrigerant 22 is compressed adiabatically at steady state from a specified inlet state to a specified exit state. The
  mass flow rate is known.
  Find: Determine the compressor power and the isentropic efficiency using (a) property tables, (b) IT.
  Schematic and Given Data:

                   2  T2 = 75°C
              2s

  T

     14 bar                             Assumptions:

     3.5 bar  1 T1 = ­5°C               1. A control volume enclosing the compressor is at steady state.

                                        2. The compression is adiabatic, and changes in kinetic and potential energy be-
                                        tween the inlet and the exit can be neglected.

                      s
                                         Figure E6.14
                                               6.8 Isentropic Efficiencies of Turbines, Nozzles, Compressors, and Pumps 253

  Analysis: (a) By assumptions 1 and 2, the mass and energy rate balances reduce to give

                                                                #      #  1  h1    h22
                                                               Wcv    m

  From Table A-9, h1  249.75 kJ/kg and h2  294.17 kJ/kg. Thus

                                    #       10.07 kg/s2 1249.75  294.172 kJ/kg          ` 1 kW `    3.11 kW
                                   Wcv                                                  1 kJ/s

  The isentropic compressor efficiency is determined using Eq. 6.50

                                                      hc       1W# cvm# 2s       1h2s  h12
                                                               1W# cvm# 2        1h2  h12

  In this expression, the denominator represents the work input per unit mass of refrigerant flowing for the actual compression
  process, as calculated above. The numerator is the work input for an isentropic compression between the initial state and the
  same exit pressure. The isentropic exit state is denoted as state 2s on the accompanying T­s diagram.

      From Table A-9, s1  0.9572 kJ/kg # K. With s2s  s1, interpolation in Table A-9 at 14 bar gives h2s  285.58 kJ/kg. Sub-
  stituting values

                                                      1285.58  249.752
                                               hc  1294.17  249.752  0.81181% 2

  (b)  The  IT  program  follows.  In  the  program,   #   is  denoted  as   Wdot,   #  as  mdot,  and  c  as  eta_c.
                                                      Wcv                           m

       // Given Data:
       T1 = ­5 // °C
       p1 = 3.5 // bar
       T2 = 75 // °C
       p2 = 14 // bar
       mdot = 0.07 // kg/s

       // Determine the specific enthalpies.
       h1 = h_PT("R22",p1,T1)
       h2 = h_PT("R22",p2,T2)

         // Calculate the power.
         Wdot = mdot * (h1 ­ h2)
         // Find h2s:
         s1 = s_PT("R22",p1,T1)

 s2s = s_Ph("R22",p2,h2s)

         s2s = s1

      // Determine the isentropic compressor efficiency.
      eta_c = (h2s ­ h1) / (h2 ­ h1)

                                          #
  Use the Solve button to obtain: Wcv  3.111 kW and hc  80.58%, which agree closely with the values obtained above.

   The minimum theoretical power for adiabatic compression from state 1 to the exit pressure of 14 bar would be

                                       #    #

                                   1Wcv2s  m1h1  h2s2  10.072 1249.75  285.582  2.51 kW

      The magnitude of the actual power required is greater than the ideal power due to irreversibilities.

   Note that IT solves for the value of h2s even though it is an implicit variable in the argument of the specific entropy

      function.
254 Chapter 6 Using Entropy

        6.9 Heat Transfer and Work in Internally
                                       Reversible, Steady-State Flow Processes
                                This section concerns one-inlet, one-exit control volumes at steady state. The objective is to
                                derive expressions for the heat transfer and the work in the absence of internal irreversibili-
                                ties. The resulting expressions have several important applications.

                                      HEAT TRANSFER

                                      For a control volume at steady state in which the flow is both isothermal and internally re-
                                      versible, the appropriate form of the entropy rate balance is

                                                                                #

                                                                        0      Qcv           #   1  s1     s22       #0
                                                                                T           m                       s cv

                                                                                                               #
                                      where 1 and 2 denote the inlet and exit, respectively, and m is the mass flow rate. Solving
                                      this equation, the heat transfer per unit of mass passing through the control volume is

                                                                                   #

                                                                                   Qcv        T 1s2          s12
                                                                                     #
                                                                                   m

                                      More generally, the temperature would vary as the gas or liquid flows through the control
                                      volume. However, we can consider the temperature variation to consist of a series of infini-
                                      tesimal steps. Then, the heat transfer per unit of mass would be given as

                                                                                      #

                                                                                   Qcv                  2
                                                                                     #
                                                                                a     m  b  int          T ds                                  (6.51)
                                                                                            rev
                                                                                                        1

      ( )·­Qm­·c­v =  2  T  ds        The subscript "int rev" serves to remind us that the expression applies only to control
                      1               volumes in which there are no internal irreversibilities. The integral of Eq. 6.51 is per-
                int                   formed from inlet to exit. When the states visited by a unit mass as it passes reversibly
                rev             2
T

   1                                  from inlet to exit are described by a curve on a T­s diagram, the magnitude of the heat

                                      transfer per unit of mass flowing can be represented as the area under the curve, as shown

                                      in Fig. 6.14.

                                      WORK

                                   s  The work per unit of mass passing through the control volume can be found from an energy
                                      rate balance, which reduces at steady state to give
 Figure 6.14 Area
representation of heat                                    ##                                            V12       V22 b
transfer for an internally
reversible flow process.                                Wcv        Qcv     1h1           h22        a                      g1z1     z22
                                                          #          #                                       2
                                                         m         m

                                      This equation is a statement of the conservation of energy principle that applies when irre-
                                      versibilities are present within the control volume as well as when they are absent. However,
                                      if consideration is restricted to the internally reversible case, Eq. 6.51 can be introduced to
                                      obtain

                                                     #                                                       a V21       V22 b

                                                      aWcvb         2   T  ds         1h1        h22                              g1z1    z22  (6.52)
                                                       #    int    1                                                2
                                                      m     rev
                                    6.9 Heat Transfer and Work in Internally Reversible, Steady-State Flow Processes 255

where the subscript "int rev" has the same significance as before. Since internal irre-
versibilities are absent, a unit of mass traverses a sequence of equilibrium states as it
passes from inlet to exit. Entropy, enthalpy, and pressure changes are therefore related by
Eq. 6.12b

                                      T ds  dh  v dp

which on integration gives

                              2                                  2

                                    T ds  1h2  h12  v dp

                                1                            1

Introducing this relation, Eq. 6.52 becomes

               #                                   a V12     V22 b

         aWcv     b                    2  v  dp                       g1z1     z22  (6.53a)     p          2
          #         int               1                   2
         m          rev

                                                                                                   2  vdp
                                                                                                   1
When the states visited by a unit of mass as it passes reversibly from inlet to exit are de-
scribed by a curve on a p­v diagram as shown in Fig. 6.15, the magnitude of the integral                                        1
 v dp is represented by the shaded area behind the curve.
                                                                                                                                  v
   Equation 6.53a may be applied to devices such as turbines, compressors, and pumps. In         Figure 6.15 Area
many of these cases, there is no significant change in kinetic or potential energy from inlet
to exit, so                                                                                     representation of 12 v dp.

                    #

                  Wcv                      2
                    #
                a m         b               v dp          1˘ke  ˘pe  02             (6.53b) 
                              int
                              rev         1

This expression shows that the work is related to the magnitude of the specific volume of
the gas or liquid as it flows from inlet to exit.  for example. . . consider two devices:
a pump through which liquid water passes and a compressor through which water vapor
passes. For the same pressure rise, the pump would require a much smaller work input per
unit of mass flowing than would the compressor because the liquid specific volume is much
smaller than that of vapor. This conclusion is also qualitatively correct for actual pumps and
compressors, where irreversibilities are present during operation. 

   If the specific volume remains approximately constant, as in many applications with liq-
uids, Eq. 6.53b becomes

   #

a  Wcv  b                   v1  p2    p12         1v  constant, ˘ke  ˘pe  02        (6.53c) 
     #    int
    m     rev

   Equation 6.53#a can also be applied to study the performance of control volumes at steady
state in which Wcv is zero, as in the case of nozzles and diffusers. For any such case, the
equation becomes

                  2                   a   V22     V21 b    g1z2     z12     0       (6.54)
                     v dp                      2

                   1

which is a form of the Bernoulli equation frequently used in fluid mechanics.                   Bernoulli equation
256 Chapter 6 Using Entropy

WORK IN POLYTROPIC PROCESSES

When each unit of mass undergoes a polytropic process as it passes through the control vol-
ume, the relationship between pressure and specific volume is pvn  constant. Introducing

this into Eq. 6.53b and performing the integration

                                   #

                                Wcv                    2                                     2 dp
                                  #                                                          1 p1n
                                 m                      v dp  1constant21n

                                                      1
                               a      b             
                                        int
                                        rev

                                                      n  n  1  1 p2v2         p1v12          1polytropic, n 12  (6.55)
                                                         

for any value of n except n  1. When n  1, pv  constant, and the work is

                                      #

                                      Wcv                 2                                  2 dp
                                        #                                                    1p
                                       m                   v dp  constant

                                                         1
                                     a       b        
                                               int
                                               rev

                                                     1 p1v12 ln1 p2p12 1polytropic, n  12                       (6.56)

Equations 6.55 and 6.56 apply generally to polytropic processes of any gas (or liquid).

IDEAL GAS CASE. For the special case of an ideal gas, Eq. 6.55 becomes

                                      #

                                   a  Wcv    b           n  nR  1  1T2        T12            1ideal gas, n 12   (6.57a)
                                        #      int          
                                       m       rev

For a polytropic process of an ideal gas, Eq. 3.56 applies:

                                                               T2           p2    1n    12n

                                                               T1      a    p1  b

Thus, Eq. 6.57a can be expressed alternatively as

                                #                                       1n    12n

                             a  Wcv   b         nRT1        c  a  p2  b                 1d   1ideal gas, n 12   (6.57b)
                                  #     int      n1
                                 m      rev                       p1

For the case of an ideal gas, Eq. 6.56 becomes

                                         #

                                      a  Wcv  b          RT     ln1   p2    p12         1ideal gas, n  12       (6.58)
                                           #    int
                                          m     rev

   In the next example, we consider air modeled as an ideal gas undergoing a polytropic
compression process at steady state.

E X A M P L E 6 . 1 5 Polytropic Compression of Air

An air compressor operates at steady state with air entering at p1  1 bar, T1  20C, and exiting at p2  5 bar. Determine
the work and heat transfer per unit of mass passing through the device, in kJ/kg, if the air undergoes a polytropic process with
n  1.3. Neglect changes in kinetic and potential energy between the inlet and the exit. Use the ideal gas model for air.

SOLUTION
Known: Air is compressed in a polytropic process from a specified inlet state to a specified exit pressure.
Find: Determine the work and heat transfer per unit of mass passing through the device.
                               6.9 Heat Transfer and Work in Internally Reversible, Steady-State Flow Processes 257

Schematic and Given Data:

        p       T2 = 425 K                                                        Assumptions:
           2
                                                                                  1. A control volume enclosing the compressor is at steady state.
                       5 bar                                                      2. The air undergoes a polytropic process with n  1.3.
                                                                                  3. The air behaves as an ideal gas.
                        pv1.3 = constant                                          4. Changes in kinetic and potential energy from inlet to exit can be
                                                                                  neglected.
                                  1
                                             1 bar

           Shaded area = magnitude of (Wcv/m)int

                                                                       rev

                                                  v
                                                           Figure E6.15

Analysis: The work is obtained using Eq. 6.57a, which requires the temperature at the exit, T2. The temperature T2 can be
found using Eq. 3.56

                                                  p2                          1n   12n             5    11.3    121.3

                               T2          T1  a  p1                        b              293  a  1  b                 425 K

Substituting known values into Eq. 6.57a then gives

           #

           Wcv                      nR  1  1T2                              T12     1.31.3      1  a 8.314        kJ    b  1425    2932  K
             #                   n                                                                  28.97       kg # K
            m

                              164.2 kJ/kg

           The heat transfer is evaluated by reducing the mass and energy rate balances with the appropriate assumptions to obtain

                                                                            #           #

                                                                            Qcv         Wcv     h2      h1
                                                                              #           #
                                                                            m            m

Using the temperatures T1 and T2, the required specific enthalpy values are obtained from Table A-22 as h1  293.17 kJ/kg

and h2  426.35 kJ/ kg. Thus

                               #

                               Qcv         164.15                                   1426.35        293.172             31  kJ/kg
                                 #
                               m

 The states visited in the polytropic compression process are shown by the curve on the accompanying p­v diagram. The

    magnitude of the work per unit of mass passing through the compressor is represented by the shaded area behind the curve.

Chapter Summary and Study Guide

In this chapter, we have introduced the property entropy and                                 entropy production. For processes of closed systems, the en-
illustrated its use for thermodynamic analysis. Like mass                                    tropy balance is Eq. 6.27, and a corresponding rate form is
and energy, entropy is an extensive property that can be trans-                              Eq. 6.32. For control volumes, rate forms include Eq. 6.37 and
ferred across system boundaries. Entropy transfer accompa-                                   the companion steady-state expression given by Eq. 6.39.
nies both heat transfer and mass flow. Unlike mass and energy,
entropy is not conserved but is produced within systems                                         The following checklist provides a study guide for this
whenever internal irreversibilities are present.                                             chapter. When your study of the text and end-of-chapter
                                                                                             exercises has been completed you should be able to
   The use of entropy balances is featured in this chapter. En-
tropy balances are expressions of the second law that account                                 write out meanings of the terms listed in the margins
for the entropy of systems in terms of entropy transfers and                                    throughout the chapter and understand each of the
258 Chapter 6 Using Entropy

   related concepts. The subset of key concepts listed                   ­determining s of ideal gases using Eq. 6.21 for
   below in is particularly important in subsequent                        variable specific heats together with Tables A-22 and
   chapters.                                                               A-23, and using Eqs. 6.22 and 6.23 for constant
                                                                           specific heats.
 apply entropy balances in each of several alternative
   forms, appropriately modeling the case at hand, correctly             ­evaluating isentropic efficiencies for turbines, nozzles,
   observing sign conventions, and carefully applying SI                   compressors, and pumps from Eqs. 6.48, 6.49, and
   and English units.                                                      6.50, respectively, including for ideal gases the appro-
                                                                           priate use of Eqs. 6.43­6.44 for variable specific
 use entropy data appropriately, to include                                heats and Eqs. 6.45­6.47 for constant specific heats.
      ­retrieving data from Tables A-2 through A-18, using
        Eq. 6.6 to evaluate the specific entropy of two-phase       apply Eq. 6.25 for closed systems and Eqs. 6.51 and
        liquid­vapor mixtures, sketching T­s and h­s                  6.53 for one-inlet, one-exit control volumes at steady
        diagrams and locating states on such diagrams, and            state, correctly observing the restriction to internally
        appropriately using Eqs. 6.7 and 6.24.                        reversible processes.

Key Engineering Concepts

entropy change p. 209        entropy transfer                      entropy rate balance        isentropic efficiencies
T­s diagram p. 211              p. 221, 232                           p. 223, 231, 233            p. 247­248
Mollier diagram p. 212
entropy balance p. 221       entropy
                                production p. 221

Exercises: Things Engineers Think About

1. Of mass, energy, and entropy, which are conserved?              T                           T  2                     3
                                                                            2
2. Both entropy and enthalpy are introduced in this text without
accompanying physical pictures. Can you think of other such        1                     3        1
properties?
                                                                                            S                              S
3. How might you explain the entropy production concept in
terms a child would understand?                                    11. Sketch T­s and p­v diagrams of a gas executing a power cy-
                                                                   cle consisting of four internally reversible processes in series: con-
4. Referring to Fig. 2.3, if systems A and B operate adiabati-     stant specific volume, constant pressure, isentropic, isothermal.
cally, does the entropy of each increase, decrease, or remain
the same?                                                          12. Sketch the T­s diagram for the Carnot vapor cycle of Fig. 5.12.

5. If a closed system would undergo an internally reversible       13. All states of an adiabatic and internally reversible process of
process and an irreversible process between the same end           a closed system have the same entropy, but is a process between
states, how would the changes in entropy for the two processes     two states having same entropy necessarily adiabatic and inter-
compare? How would the amounts of entropy produced                 nally reversible?
compare?
                                                                   14. Discuss the operation of a turbine in the limit as isentropic
6. Is is possible for the entropy of both a closed system and its  efficiency approaches 100%; in the limit as isentropic efficiency
surroundings to decrease during a process?                         approaches 0%.

7. Describe a process of a closed system for which the entropy     15. What can be deduced from energy and entropy balances
of both the system and its surroundings increase.                  about a system undergoing a thermodynamic cycle while receiv-
                                                                   ing energy by heat transfer at temperature TC and discharging en-
8. How can entropy be transferred into, or out of, a closed sys-   ergy by heat transfer at a higher temperature TH, if these are the
tem? A control volume?                                             only energy transfers the system experiences?

9. What happens to the entropy produced in a one-inlet, one-exit   16. Reducing irreversibilities within a system can improve its therm-
control volume at steady state?                                    odynamic performance, but steps taken in this direction are usually
                                                                   constrained by other considerations. What are some of these?
10. The two power cycles shown to the same scale in the figure
are composed of internally reversible processes. Compare the net
work developed by these cycles. Which cycle has the greater
thermal efficiency?
                                                                                 Problems: Developing Engineering Skills 259

Problems: Developing Engineering Skills

Exploring Fundamentals                                                                      Surroundings
                                                                                                                               T0
6.1 A system executes a power cycle while receiving 1000 kJ
   by heat transfer at a temperature of 500 K and discharging en-                           Q0
   ergy by heat transfer at a temperature of 300 K. There are no
   other heat transfers. Applying Eq. 6.2, determine cycle if the                       Qs                                         Qu
   thermal efficiency is (a) 60%, (b) 40%, (c) 20%. Identify the
   cases (if any) that are internally reversible or impossible.       Air

6.2 A reversible power cycle R and an irreversible power cycle I           Fuel     Ts          Tu
   operate between the same two reservoirs. Each receives QH from
   the hot reservoir. The reversible cycle develops work WR,           Figure P6.6
   while the irreversible cycle develops work WI. The reversible
   cycle discharges QC to the cold reservoir, while the irreversible                                                    #
   cycle discharges QC.                                                  Ts, and delivering energy at the rate Qu at a use temperature
                                                                         Tu. There are no other energy transfers. For Ts  Tu  T0,# ob-
   (a) Evaluate cycle for cycle I in terms of WI, WR, and tem-           tain an exp# ression for the maximum theoretical value of Qu in
        perature TC of the cold reservoir only.                          terms of Qs and the temperatures Ts, Tu, and T0.

   (b) Demonstrate that WI  WR and QC  QC.                            6.7 Answer the following true or false. If false, explain why.

6.3 A reversible refrigeration cycle R and an irreversible re-           (a) The change of entropy of a closed system is the same for
   frigeration cycle I operate between the same two reservoirs                every process between two specified states.
   and each removes QC from the cold reservoir. The net work
   input required by R is WR, while the net work input for I is          (b) The entropy of a fixed amount of an ideal gas increases in
   WI. The reversible cycle discharges QH to the hot reservoir,               every isothermal compression.
   while the irreversible cycle discharges QH. Show that WI  WR
   and QH  QH.                                                           (c) The specific internal energy and enthalpy of an ideal gas
                                                                             are each functions of temperature alone but its specific en-
6.4 A reversible power cycle receives energy Q1 and Q2 from                  tropy depends on two independent intensive properties.
   hot reservoirs at temperatures T1 and T2, respectively, and dis-
   charges energy Q3 to a cold reservoir at temperature T3.              (d) One of the T ds equations has the form T ds  du  p dv.
                                                                         (e) The entropy of a fixed amount of an incompressible sub-
   (a) Obtain an expression for the thermal efficiency in terms of
        the ratios T1T3, T2T3, q  Q2Q1.                                      stance increases in every process in which temperature
                                                                             decreases.
   (b) Discuss the result of part (a) in each of these limits: lim
        q S 0, lim q S , lim T1 S .                                   6.8 A closed system consists of an ideal gas with constant spe-
                                                                         cific heat ratio k.
6.5 Complete the following involving reversible and irreversible
   cycles:                                                               (a) The gas undergoes a process in which temperature in-
                                                                              creases from T1 to T2. Show that the entropy change for
   (a) Reversible and irreversible power cycles each discharge                the process is greater if the change in state occurs at con-
        energy QC to a cold reservoir at temperature TC and re-               stant pressure than if it occurs at constant volume. Sketch
        ceive energy QH from hot reservoirs at temperatures TH and            the processes on p­v and T­s coordinates.
        T H, respectively. There are no other heat transfers. Show
        that T H  TH.                                                    (b) Using the results of (a), show on T­s coordinates that a
                                                                              line of constant specific volume passing through a state
   (b) Reversible and irreversible refrigeration cycles each dis-             has a greater slope than a line of constant pressure pass-
        charge energy QH to a hot reservoir at temperature TH and             ing through that state.
        receive energy QC from cold reservoirs at temperatures TC
        and T C, respectively. There are no other heat transfers.        (c) The gas undergoes a process in which pressure increases
        Show that TC  TC.                                                    from p1 to p2. Show that the ratio of the entropy change
                                                                             for an isothermal process to the entropy change for a
   (c) Reversible and irreversible heat pump cycles each receive             constant-volume process is (1  k). Sketch the processes
       energy QC from a cold reservoir at temperature TC and dis-            on p­v and T­s coordinates.
       charge energy QH to hot reservoirs at temperatures TH and
       TH, respectively. There are no other heat transfers. Show      6.9 Answer the following true or false. If false, explain why.
       that TH  TH.
                                                                         (a) A process that violates the second law of thermodynam-
6.6 The system shown schematically in Fig. P6.6 undergoes a                   ics violates the first law of thermodynamics.
   cycle while receiving energy# at the rate Q0 from the sur-
   roundings at temperature T0, Qs from a source at temperature
260 Chapter 6 Using Entropy

   (b) When a net amount of work is done on a closed system            and at the other end with a wall at a lower temperature TC. The
        undergoing an internally reversible process, a net heat        temperature within the rod initially varies linearly with posi-
        transfer of energy from the system also occurs.                tion z according to

   (c) One corollary of the second law of thermodynamics states                          T 1z2     TH      a TH      TC b  z
       that the change in entropy of a closed system must be                                                     L
       greater than zero or equal to zero.
                                                                       The rod is then insulated on its ends and eventually comes to
   (d) A closed system can experience an increase in entropy only
        when irreversibilities are present within the system during    a final equilibrium state where the temperature is Tf. Evaluate
        the process.                                                   Tf in terms of TH and TC and show that the amount of entropy
                                                                       produced is
   (e) Entropy is produced in every internally reversible process
       of a closed system.                                             s       mc  a1    ln  Tf    TH  TC  TC  ln  TC      TH  TH  TC  ln  THb
                                                                                                                               
   (f ) In an adiabatic and internally reversible process of a closed
       system, the entropy remains constant.                              where c is the specific heat of the rod.

   (g) The energy of an isolated system must remain constant,          6.15 A system undergoing a thermodynamic cycle receives QH
        but the entropy can only decrease.                                at temperature TH and discharges QC at temperature TC. There
                                                                          are no other heat transfers.
6.10 A fixed mass of water m, initially a saturated liquid, is
   brought to a saturated vapor condition while its pressure and          (a) Show that the net work developed per cycle is given by
   temperature remain constant.
                                                                                        Wcycle    QH   a1    T żC b    T żC s
   (a) Derive expressions for the work and heat transfer in terms                                            T żH
        of the mass m and properties that can be obtained directly
        from the steam tables.                                              where  is the amount of entropy produced per cycle owing

   (b) Demonstrate that this process is internally reversible.              to irreversibilities within the system.

6.11 A quantity of air is shown in Fig. 6.8. Consider a process        (b) If the heat transfers QH and QC are with hot and cold reser-
   in which the temperature of the air increases by some combi-             voirs, respectively, what is the relationship of TH to the
   nation of stirring and heating. Assuming the ideal gas model             temperature of the hot reservoir TH and the relationship of
   for the air, suggest how this might be done with                         TC to the temperature of the cold reservoir TC?

   (a) minimum entropy production.                                     (c) Obtain an expression for Wcycle if there are (i) no inter-
   (b) maximum entropy production.                                         nal irreversibilities, (ii) no internal or external irre-

6.12 Taken together, a certain closed system and its surround-             versibilities.
   ings make up an isolated system. Answer the following true or
   false. If false, explain why.                                       6.16 A system undergoes a thermodynamic power cycle while
                                                                          receiving energy by heat transfer from an incompressible body
   (a) No process is allowed in which the entropies of both the           of mass m and specific heat c initially at temperature TH. The
        system and the surroundings increase.                             system undergoing the cycle discharges energy by heat trans-
                                                                          fer to another incompressible body of mass m and specific heat
   (b) During a process, the entropy of the system might de-              c initially at a lower temperature TC. Work is developed by the
        crease, while the entropy of the surroundings increases,          cycle until the temperature of each of the two bodies is the
        and conversely.                                                   same, T.

   (c) No process is allowed in which the entropies of both the        (a) Develop an expression for the minimum theoretical
       system and the surroundings remain unchanged.
                                                                          final temperature, T, in terms of m, c, TH, and TC, as
   (d) A process can occur in which the entropies of both the             required.
        system and the surroundings decrease.
                                                                       (b) Develop an expression for the maximum theoretical
6.13 An isolated system of total mass m is formed by mixing
   two equal masses of the same liquid initially at the tempera-            amount of work that can be developed, Wmax, in terms of
   tures T1 and T2. Eventually, the system attains an equilibrium           m, c, TH, and TC, as required.
   state. Each mass is incompressible with constant specific           (c) What is the minimum theoretical work input that would be
   heat c.

   (a) Show that the amount of entropy produced is

     mc  ln  c  T1  T2       d                                            required by a refrigeration cycle to restore the two bodies
                21T1T2212
s                                                                         from temperature T to their respective initial temperatures,

                                                                          TH and TC?

   (b) Demonstrate that  must be positive.                             6.17 At steady state, an insulated mixing chamber receives two

6.14 A cylindrical rod of length L insulated on its lateral surface    liquid  streams  of  the  same  substance   at  temperatures    T1  and  T2
   is initially in contact at one end with a wall at temperature TH                               #       #
                                                                       and mass flow rates m1 and m2, respectively. A single stream
                                                                       Problems: Developing Engineering Skills 261

                   #                                                      (b) air as an ideal gas, T1  27C, p1  1.5 bar, T2  127C.
exits at T3 and m3. Using the incompressible substance model                   Find p2 in bar.
with constant specific heat c, obtain an expression for
                                                                          (c) Refrigerant 134a, T1  20C, p1  5 bar, p2  1 bar. Find
(a) T3 in terms of T1, T2, and the ratio of mass flow rates m# 1m# 3.         v2 in m3/kg.

(b) the rate of entropy production per unit of mass exiting the        6.23 One kilogram of oxygen (O2) modeled as an ideal gas
     chamber in terms of c, T1T2, and m# 1m# 3.                           undergoes a process from 300 K, 2 bar to 1500 K, 1.5 bar.
                                                                          Determine the change in specific entropy, in kJ/kg # K, using
(c)  For fixed values of c   and T1T2, determine the value   of
                              rate of entropy production is   a           (a) Equation 6.19 with cp1T 2 from Table A-21.
     m# 1m# 3 for which the                                               (b) Equation 6.21b with s° from Table A-23.
                                                                          (c) Equation 6.23 with cp at 900 K from Table A-20.
     maximum.                                                             (d) IT.

Using Entropy Data                                                     6.24 Five kilograms of ammonia undergo a process from an
                                                                          initial state where the pressure is 8 bar and the temperature
6.18 Using the tables for water, determine the specific entropy           is 100C to a final state of 8 bar, 0C. Determine the entropy
   at the indicated states, in kJ/kg # K. Check the results using IT.     change of the ammonia, in kJ/K, assuming the process is
   In each case, locate the state by hand on a sketch of the T­s
   diagram.                                                               (a) irreversible.
                                                                          (b) internally reversible.
   (a) p  5.0 MPa, T  400C
   (b) p  5.0 MPa, T  100C                                             6.25 A quantity of liquid water undergoes a process from 80C,
   (c) p  5.0 MPa, u  1872.5 kJ/kg                                        5 MPa to saturated liquid at 40C. Determine the change in
   (d) p  5.0 MPa, saturated vapor                                        specific entropy, in kJkg # K, using

6.19 Using the appropriate table, determine the change in spe-            (a) Tables A-2 and A-5.
   cific entropy between the specified states, in kJ/kg # K. Check        (b) saturated liquid data only from Table A-2.
   the results using IT.                                                  (c) the incompressible liquid model with a constant specific

   (a) water, p1  10 MPa, T1  400C, p2  10 MPa,                               heat from Table A-19.
        T2  100C.                                                         (d) IT.

   (b) Refrigerant 134a, h1  111.44 kJ/kg, T1  40C,                    6.26 One-quarter lbmol of nitrogen gas (N2) undergoes a
        saturated vapor at p2  5 bar.                                     process from p1  20 lbf/in.2, T1  500R to p2  150 lbf/in.2,
                                                                          T2  800R. For the process W  500 Btu. Employing the
   (c) air as an ideal gas, T1  7C, p1  2 bar, T2  327C,                  ideal gas model, determine
       p2  1 bar.
                                                                          (a) the heat transfer, in Btu.
   (d) hydrogen (H2) as an ideal gas, T1  727C, p1  1 bar,                (b) the change in entropy, in Btu/R.
        T2  25C, p2  3 bar.                                               (c) Show the initial and final states on a T­s diagram.

6.20 One kilogram of Refrigerant 22 undergoes a process from           6.27 Methane gas (CH4) enters a compressor at 298 K, 1 bar
   0.2 MPa, 20C to a state where the pressure is 0.06 MPa. Dur-           and exits at 2 bar and temperature T. Employing the ideal gas
   ing the process there is a change in specific entropy, s2  s1          model, determine T, in K, if there is no change in specific en-
   0.55 kJ/kg # K. Determine the temperature at the final state, in       tropy from inlet to exit.
   C, and the final specific enthalpy, in kJ/kg.
                                                                       Analyzing Internally Reversible Processes
6.21 Employing the ideal gas model, determine the change in            6.28 A quantity of air amounting to 2.42  102 kg undergoes
   specific entropy between the indicated states, in kJ/kg # K.
   Solve three ways: Use the appropriate ideal gas table, IT, and         a thermodynamic cycle consisting of three internally reversible
   a constant specific heat value from Table A-20.                        processes in series.

   (a) air, p1  100 kPa, T1  20C, p2  100 kPa, T2                      Process 1­2: constant-volume heating at V  0.02 m3 from
        100C.                                                                p1  0.1 MPa to p2  0.42 MPa

   (b) air, p1  1 bar, T1  27C, p2  3 bar, T2  377C.                   Process 2­3: constant-pressure cooling
   (c) carbon dioxide, p1  150 kPa, T1  30C, p2  300 kPa,
                                                                       Process 3­1: isothermal heating to the initial state
       T2  300C.
   (d) carbon monoxide, T1  300 K, v1  1.1 m3/kg, T2  500 K,              Employing the ideal gas model with cp  1 kJ/kg # K, evalu-
                                                                          ate the change in entropy, in kJ/K, for each process. Sketch
        v2  0.75 m3/kg.                                                   the cycle on p­v and T­s coordinates.
   (e) nitrogen, p1  2 MPa, T1  800 K, p2  1 MPa,
                                                                       6.29 One kilogram of water initially at 160C, 1.5 bar under-
       T2  300 K.                                                         goes an isothermal, internally reversible compression process

6.22 Using the appropriate table, determine the indicated
   property for a process in which there is no change in spe-
   cific entropy between state 1 and state 2. Check the results
   using IT.
   (a) water, T1  10C, x1  0.75, saturated vapor at state 2.
        Find p2 in bar.
262 Chapter 6 Using Entropy

   to the saturated liquid state. Determine the work and heat trans-  Process 2­3: adiabatic compression to 550 K, 6.25 bar
   fer, each in kJ. Sketch the process on p­v and T­s coordinates.
   Associate the work and heat transfer with areas on these           Process 3­1: constant-pressure compression
   diagrams.
                                                                         Employing the ideal gas model,
6.30 A gas initially at 14 bar and 60C expands to a final pres-
   sure of 2.8 bar in an isothermal, internally reversible process.      (a) sketch the cycle on p­v and T­s coordinates.
   Determine the heat transfer and the work, each in kJ per kg of        (b) determine T1, in K
   gas, if the gas is (a) Refrigerant 134a, (b) air as an ideal gas.     (c) If the cycle is a power cycle, determine its thermal effi-
   Sketch the processes on p­v and T­s coordinates.
                                                                             ciency. If the cycle is a refrigeration cycle, determine its
6.31 Reconsider the data of Problem 6.37, but now suppose                    coefficient of performance.
   the gas expands to 2.8 bar isentropically. Determine the work,
   in kJ per kg of gas, if the gas is (a) Refrigerant 134a, (b) air   6.37 Figure P6.37 gives the schematic of a vapor power plant
   as an ideal gas. Sketch the processes on p­v and T­s                  in which water steadily circulates through the four components
   coordinates.                                                          shown. The water flows through the boiler and condenser at
                                                                         constant pressure, and flows through the turbine and pump
6.32 Nitrogen (N2) initially occupying 0.5 m3 at 1.0 bar, 20C            adiabatically.
   undergoes an internally reversible compression during which
   pV1.30  constant to a final state where the temperature is            (a) Sketch the cycle on T­s coordinates.
   200C. Determine assuming the ideal gas model                          (b) Determine the thermal efficiency and compare with the

   (a) the pressure at the final state, in bar.                               thermal efficiency of a Carnot cycle operating between the
   (b) the work and heat transfer, each in kJ.                                same maximum and minimum temperatures.
   (c) the entropy change, in kJ/K.
6.33 Air initially occupying a volume of 1 m3 at 1 bar, 20C                        Hot reservoir
   undergoes two internally reversible processes in series                                   ·
                                                                                            QH
Process 1­2: compression to 5 bar, 110C during which
      pV n  constant                                                  Saturated 4  Boiler                      1 Saturated
                                                                      liquid at                                     vapor at
Process 2­3: adiabatic expansion to 1 bar                             10 bar                                        10 bar

   (a) Sketch the two processes on p­v and T­s coordinates.           Work         Pump       Turbine
   (b) Determine n.
   (c) Determine the temperature at state 3, in C.                      0.2 bar,                               Work
   (d) Determine the net work, in kJ.                                   x = 18% 3
                                                                                   Condenser                        0.2 bar,
6.34 One-tenth kilogram of water executes a Carnot power                                                       2 x = 88%
   cycle. At the beginning of the isothermal expansion, the water
   is a saturated liquid at 160C. The isothermal expansion                                                ·
   continues until the quality is 98%. The temperature at the                                            QC
   conclusion of the adiabatic expansion is 20C.                                               Cold reservoir

   (a) Sketch the cycle on T­s and p­v coordinates.                    Figure P6.37
   (b) Determine the heat added and net work, each in kJ.
   (c) Evaluate the thermal efficiency.                               Applying the Entropy Balance: Closed Systems

6.35 One pound mass of air as an ideal gas undergoes a Carnot         6.38 A closed system undergoes a process in which work is done
   power cycle. At the beginning of the isothermal expansion, the        on the system and the heat transfer Q occurs only at temperature
   temperature is 880K and the pressure is 8 MPa. The isothermal         Tb. For each case, determine whether the entropy change of the
   compression occurs at 280K and the heat added per cycle is            system is positive, negative, zero, or indeterminate.
   42 kW. Assuming the ideal gas model for the air, determine
                                                                         (a) internally reversible process, Q  0.
   (a) the pressures at the end of the isothermal expansion, the         (b) internally reversible process, Q  0.
        adiabatic expansion, and the isothermal compression, each        (c) internally reversible process, Q  0.
        in MPa.                                                          (d) internal irreversibilities present, Q  0.
                                                                         (e) internal irreversibilities present, Q  0.
   (b) the net work developed per cycle, kW.                             (f) internal irreversibilities present, Q  0.
   (c) the thermal efficiency.
                                                                      6.39 For each of the following systems, specify whether the en-
6.36 A quantity of air undergoes a thermodynamic cycle con-              tropy change during the indicated process is positive, negative,
   sisting of three internally reversible processes in series.           zero, or indeterminate.

Process 1­2: isothermal expansion from 6.25 to 1.0 bar                   (a) One kilogram of water vapor undergoing an adiabatic com-
                                                                              pression process.
                                                                                    Problems: Developing Engineering Skills 263

   (b) Two kg mass of nitrogen heated in an internally reversible       6.48 For the silicon chip of Example 2.5, determine the rate of
        process.                                                           entropy production, in kW/K. What is the cause of entropy
                                                                           production in this case?
   (c) One kilogram of Refrigerant 134a undergoing an adiabatic
       process during which it is stirred by a paddle wheel.            6.49 An electric water heater having a 200 liter capacity
                                                                           employs an electric resistor to heat water from 23 to 55C. The
   (d) One kg mass of carbon dioxide cooled isothermally.                  outer surface of the resistor remains at an average temperature
   (e) Two kg mass of oxygen modeled as an ideal gas undergo-              of 80C. Heat transfer from the outside of the water heater is
                                                                           negligible and the states of the resistor and the tank holding
       ing a constant-pressure process to a higher temperature.            the water do not change significantly. Modeling the water as
   (f ) Two kilograms of argon modeled as an ideal gas undergo-            incompressible, determine the amount of entropy produced, in
                                                                           kJ/K, for
       ing an isothermal process to a lower pressure.
                                                                           (a) the water as the system.
6.40 A piston­cylinder assembly initially contains 0.04 m3 of              (b) the overall water heater including the resistor.
   water at 1.0 MPa, 320C. The water expands adiabatically to
   a final pressure of 0.1 MPa. Develop a plot of the work done            Compare the results of parts (a) and (b), and discuss.
   by the water, in kJ, versus the amount of entropy produced, in
   kJ/K.                                                                6.50 At steady state, a 20-W curling iron has an outer surface
                                                                           temperature of 80C. For the curling iron, the rate of entropy
6.41 An insulated piston­cylinder assembly contains Refriger-              production, in Btu/ h  R.
   ant 134a, initially occupying 0.017 m3 at .6 MPa, 40C. The
   refrigerant expands to a final state where the pressure is .32 MPa.  6.51 An electric motor operating at steady state draws a current
   The work developed by the refrigerant is measured as 5.275 kJ.          of 10 amp with a voltage of 220 V. The output shaft rotates
   Can this value be correct?                                              at 1000 RPM with a torque of 16 N # m applied to an exter-
                                                                           nal load. The rate of heat transfer from the motor to its sur-
6.42 One kilogram of air is initially at 1 bar and 450 K. Can a            roundings is related to the surface temperature Tb and the am-
   final state at 2 bar and 350 K be attained in an adiabatic process?     bient temperature T0 by hA(Tb  T0), where h  100 W/m2 #
                                                                           K, A  0.195 m2, and T0  293 K. Energy transfers are con-
6.43 Air as an ideal gas is compressed from a state where the              sidered positive in the directions indicated by the arrows on
   pressure is 0.1 MPa and the temperature is 27C to a state where         Fig. P6.51.
   the pressure is 0.5 MPa and the temperature is 207C. Can this
   process occur adiabatically? If yes, determine the work per unit        (a) Determine the temperature Tb, in K.
   mass of air, in kJ/kg, for an adiabatic process between these           (b) For the motor as the system, determine the rate of entropy
   states. If no, determine the direction of the heat transfer.
                                                                                production, in kW/K.
6.44 Two kilograms of Refrigerant 134a initially at 1.4 bar,               (c) If the system boundary is located to take in enough of the
   60C are compressed to saturated vapor at 60C. During this
   process, the temperature of the refrigerant departs by no more              nearby surroundings for heat transfer to take place at tem-
   than 0.01C from 60C. Determine the minimum theoretical                      perature T0, determine the rate of entropy production, in
   heat transfer from the refrigerant during the process, in kJ.               kW/K, for the enlarged system.

6.45 A patent application describes a device that at steady state       T0 = 293 K  Q·
   receives a heat transfer at the rate 1 kW at a temperature of
   167C and generates electricity. There are no other energy             ·          Tb = ?   ·
   transfers. Does the claimed performance violate any principles       Welec +             Wshaft
   of thermodynamics? Explain.
                                                                                 ­                         Figure P6.51
6.46 One-half kilogram of propane initially at 4 bar, 30C
   undergoes a process to 14 bar, 100C while being rapidly com-         6.52 At steady state, work at a rate of 25 kW is done by a pad-
   pressed in a piston­cylinder assembly. Heat transfer with the           dle wheel on a slurry contained within a closed, rigid tank. Heat
   surroundings at 20C occurs through a thin wall. The net work            transfer from the tank occurs at a temperature of 250C to sur-
   is measured as 72.5 kJ. Kinetic and potential energy effects            roundings that, away from the immediate vicinity of the tank,
   can be ignored. Determine whether it is possible for the work           are at 27C. Determine the rate of entropy production, in kW/K,
   measurement to be correct.
                                                                           (a) for the tank and its contents as the system.
6.47 One kilogram mass of air in a piston­cylinder assembly                (b) for an enlarged system including the tank and enough of
   is compressed adiabatically from 4C, 1 bar to 5 bars.
                                                                                the nearby surroundings for the heat transfer to occur at
   (a) If the air is compressed without internal irreversibilities,             27C.
        determine the temperature at the final state, in C, and the
        work required, in kJ.

   (b) If the compression requires 20% more work than found in
        part (a), determine the temperature at the final state, in F,
        and the amount of entropy produced, in kJ/K.

   (c) Show the processes of parts (a) and (b) on T­s coordinates.

   Employ the ideal gas model.
264 Chapter 6 Using Entropy

6.53 A system consists of 2 m3 of hydrogen gas (H2), initially         which energy is conducted into the rod from the hot wall is
   at 35C, 215 kPa, contained in a closed rigid tank. Energy is
   transferred to the system from a reservoir at 300C until the         #                   kA1TH       TC2
   temperature of the hydrogen is 160C. The temperature at the         QH                          L
   system boundary where heat transfer occurs is 300C. Model-
   ing the hydrogen as an ideal gas, determine the heat transfer,         where  is the thermal conductivity of the copper rod.
   in kJ, the change in entropy, in kJ/K, and the amount of en-
   tropy produced, in kJ/K. For the reservoir, determine the              (a) For the rod as the system, obtain an expression for the time
   change in entropy, in kJ/K. Why do these two entropy changes                rate of entropy production in terms of A, L, TH, TC, and k.
   differ?
                                                                          (b) If TH  327°C, TC  77°C, #  0.4 kWm # K, A  0.1
6.54 An isolated system consists of a closed aluminum vessel                   m2, plot the heat transfer rate QH, in kW, and the time rate
   of mass 0.1 kg containing 1 kg of used engine oil, each initially           of entropy production, in kW/K, each versus L ranging
   at 55C, immersed in a 10-kg bath of liquid water, initially at              from 0.01 to 1.0 m. Discuss.
   20C. The system is allowed to come to equilibrium. Determine
                                                                       6.59 A system undergoes a thermodynamic cycle while receiv-
   (a) the final temperature, in degrees centigrade.                      ing energy by heat transfer from a tank of liquid water initially
   (b) the entropy changes, each in kJ/K, for the aluminum                at 90C and rejecting energy by heat transfer at 15C to the
                                                                          surroundings. If the final water temperature is 15C, determine
        vessel, the oil, and the water.                                   the minimum theoretical volume of water in the tank, m3, for
   (c) the amount of entropy produced, in kJ/K.                           the cycle to produce net work equal to 1.6  105 kJ.

6.55 An insulated cylinder is initially divided into halves by a       6.60 The temperature of an incompressible substance of mass
   frictionless, thermally conducting piston. On one side of the          m and specific heat c is reduced from T0 to T (T0) by a re-
   piston is 1 m3 of a gas at 300 K, 2 bar. On the other side is 1 m3     frigeration cycle. The cycle receives energy by heat transfer at
   of the same gas at 300 K, 1 bar. The piston is released and equi-      T from the substance and discharges energy by heat transfer at
   librium is attained, with the piston experiencing no change of         T0 to the surroundings. There are no other heat transfers. Plot
   state. Employing the ideal gas model for the gas, determine            (WminmcT0) versus TT0 ranging from 0.8 to 1.0, where Wmin
                                                                          is the minimum theoretical work input required by the cycle.
   (a) the final temperature, in K.
   (b) the final pressure, in bar.                                     6.61 The temperature of a 12-oz (0.354-L) can of soft drink is
   (c) the amount of entropy produced, in kJ/ kg.                         reduced from 20 to 5C by a refrigeration cycle. The cycle re-
                                                                          ceives energy by heat transfer from the soft drink and dis-
6.56 An insulated, rigid tank is divided into two compartments            charges energy by heat transfer at 20C to the surroundings.
   by a frictionless, thermally conducting piston. One compart-           There are no other heat transfers. Determine the minimum the-
   ment initially contains 1 m3 of saturated water vapor at 4 MPa         oretical work input required by the cycle, in kJ, assuming the
   and the other compartment contains 1 m3 of water vapor at              soft drink is an incompressible liquid with the properties of
   20 MPa, 800C. The piston is released and equilibrium is                liquid water. Ignore the aluminum can.
   attained, with the piston experiencing no change of state. For
   the water as the system, determine                                  6.62 As shown in Fig. P6.62, a turbine is located between two
                                                                          tanks. Initially, the smaller tank contains steam at 3.0 MPa,
   (a) the final pressure, in MPa.                                        280C and the larger tank is evacuated. Steam is allowed to
   (b) the final temperature, in C.                                       flow from the smaller tank, through the turbine, and into the
   (c) the amount of entropy produced, in kJ/K.                           larger tank until equilibrium is attained. If heat transfer with
                                                                          the surroundings is negligible, determine the maximum theo-
6.57 A system consisting of air initially at 300 K and 1 bar ex-          retical work that can be developed, in kJ.
   periences the two different types of interactions described
   below. In each case, the system is brought from the initial state   Initially: steam
   to a state where the temperature is 500 K, while volume             at 3.0 MPa, 280°C
   remains constant.
                                                                                               Turbine  Initially evacuated
   (a) The temperature rise is brought about adiabatically by stir-                                           1000 m3
        ring the air with a paddle wheel. Determine the amount of           100 m3
        entropy produced, in kJ/kg # K.                                 Figure P6.62

   (b) The temperature rise is brought about by heat transfer from
        a reservoir at temperature T. The temperature at the sys-
        tem boundary where heat transfer occurs is also T. Plot the
        amount of entropy produced, in kJ/kg # K, versus T for
        T  500 K. Compare with the result of (a) and discuss.

6.58 A cylindrical copper rod of base area A and length L is in-
   sulated on its lateral surface. One end of the rod is in contact
   with a wall at temperature TH. The other end is in contact with
   a wall at a lower temperature TC. At steady state, the rate at
                                                                       Problems: Developing Engineering Skills 265

Applying the Entropy Balance: Control Volumes                          6.69 An inventor claims to have developed a device requiring
                                                                          no work input or heat transfer, yet able to produce at steady
6.63 A gas flows through a one-inlet, one-exit control# volume            state hot and cold air streams as shown in Fig. P6.69. Em-
   operating at steady state. Heat transfer at the rate Qcv takes         ploying the ideal gas model for air and ignoring kinetic and
   place only at a location on the boundary where the tempera-            potential energy effects, evaluate this claim.
   ture is Tb. For each of the following cases, determine whether
   the specific entropy of the gas at the exit is greater than, equal                 ·  ·
   to, or less than the specific entropy of the gas at the inlet:                     Qcv = 0, Wcv = 0
                                           #                                                            Air at 60°C,
   (a) no internal irreversibilities, Q# cv  0.                        Air at 20°C,                     2.7 bar
   (b) no internal irreversibilities, Q# cv  0.                        2.74 bar
   (c) no internal irreversibilities# , Qcv  0.                                                         Air at 0°C,
   (d) internal irreversibilities, Q# cv  0.                                                            2.7 bar
   (e) internal irreversibilities, Qcv  0.
                                                                        Figure P6.69
6.64 Steam at 10 bar, 600C, 50 m/s enters an insulated turbine
   operating at steady state and exits at 0.35 bar, 100 m/s. The work  6.70 Ammonia enters a valve as a saturated liquid at 7 bar with
   developed per kg of steam flowing is claimed to be (a) 1000            a mass flow rate of 0.06 kg/min and is steadily throttled to a
   kJ/kg, (b) 500 kJ/kg. Can either claim be correct? Explain.            pressure of 1 bar. Determine the rate of entropy production in
                                                                          kW/K. If the valve were replaced by a power-recovery turbine
6.65 Air enters an insulated turbine operating at steady state at         operating at steady state, determine the maximum theoretical
   6.5 bar, 687C and exits at 1 bar, 327C. Neglecting kinetic             power that could be developed, in kW. In each case, ignore
   and potential energy changes and assuming the ideal gas                heat transfer with the surroundings and changes in kinetic and
   model, determine                                                       potential energy. Would you recommend using such a turbine?

   (a) the work developed, in kJ per kg of air flowing through         6.71 Air enters an insulated diffuser operating at steady state at
        the turbine.                                                      1 bar, 3C, and 260 m /s and exits with a velocity of 130 m/s.
                                                                          Employing the ideal gas model and ignoring potential energy,
   (b) whether the expansion is internally reversible, irreversible,      determine
        or impossible.
                                                                          (a) the temperature of the air at the exit, in C.
6.66 Methane gas (CH4) at 280 K, 1 bar enters a compressor                (b) The maximum attainable exit pressure, in bar.
   operating at steady state and exits at 380 K, 3.5 bar. Ignoring
   heat transfer with the surroundings and employing the ideal         6.72 According to test data, a new type of engine takes in
   gas model with cp1T 2 from Table A-21, determine the rate of           streams of water at 200C, 3 bar and 100C, 3 bar. The mass
   entropy production within the compressor, in kJ/kg # K.                flow rate of the higher temperature stream is twice that of the
                                                                          other. A single stream exits at 3.0 bar with a mass flow rate of
6.67 Figure P6.67 provides steady-state operating data for a              5400 kg/h. There is no significant heat transfer between the
   well-insulated device with air entering at one location and ex-        engine and its surroundings, and kinetic and potential energy
   iting at another with a mass flow rate of 10 kg/s. Assuming            effects are negligible. For operation at steady state, determine
   ideal gas behavior and negligible potential energy effects, de-        the maximum theoretical rate that power can be developed,
   termine the direction of flow and the power, in kW.                    in kW.

                          ?    Power shaft                             6.73 At steady state, a device receives a stream of saturated
                                                                          water vapor at 210C and discharges a condensate stream at
 p = 1 bar                   ?                                            20C, 0.1 MPa while delivering energy by heat transfer
 T = 600 K                                                                at 300C. The only other energy transfer involves heat trans-
 V = 1000 m/s                                p = 5 bar                    fer at 20C to the surroundings. Kinetic and potential energy
 Figure P6.67                                T = 900 K                    changes are negligible. What is the maximum theoretical
                                             V = 5 m/s                    amount of energy, in kJ per kg of steam entering, that could be
                                                                          delivered at 300C?
6.68 Hydrogen gas (H2) at 35C and pressure p enters an insu-
   la# ted control volume operating at steady state for which          6.74 A patent application describes a device for chilling water.
   Wcv  0. Half of the hydrogen exits the device at 2 bar and             At steady state, the device receives energy by heat transfer at
   90C and the other half exits at 2 bar and 20C. The effects             a location on its surface where the temperature is 540F and
                                                                          discharges energy by heat transfer to the surroundings at an-
   of kinetic and potential energy are negligible. Employing the          other location on its surface where the temperature is 100F.
   ideal gas model with constant cp  14.3 kJ/kg # K, determine            A warm liquid water stream enters at 100F, 1 atm and a cool
   the minimum possible value for the inlet pressure p, in bar.           stream exits at temperature T and 1 atm. The device requires
                                                                          no power input to operate, there are no significant effects of
                                                                          kinetic and potential energy, and the water can be modeled as
266 Chapter 6 Using Entropy

   incompressible. Plot the minimum theoretical heat addition re-     30-ohm resistor, T = 127°C
   quired, in Btu per lb of cool water exiting the device, versus
   T ranging from 60 to 100F.                                                      +  ­

6.75 Figure P6.75 shows a proposed device to develop power              Air in at        Air out at 25°C
   using energy supplied to the device by heat transfer from a        15°C, 1 atm
   high-temperature industrial process together with a steam in-
   put. The figure provides data for steady-state operation. All                                           Figure P6.77
   surfaces are well insulated except for the one at 527C, through
   which heat transfer occurs at a rate of 4.21 kW. Ignoring             The air enters the duct at 15C, 1 atm and exits at 25C with
   changes in kinetic and potential energy, evaluate the maximum         a negligible change in pressure. Kinetic and potential energy
   theoretical power that can be developed, in kW.                       changes can be ignored.

                                                   ·                     (a) For the resistor as the system, determine the rate of en-
                                                  Qcv = 4.21 kW               tropy production, in kW/K.

Steam at 3 bar          527°C                       ·                    (b) For a control volume enclosing the air in the duct and the
500°C, 1.58 kg/min                                 Wcv                        resistor, determine the volumetric flow rate of the air en-
                                        2 1 bar                               tering the duct, in m3/s, and rate of entropy production, in
                     1                                                        kW/K.

 Figure P6.75                                                            Why do the entropy production values of (a) and (b) differ?

6.76 Figure P6.76 shows a gas turbine power plant operat-             6.78 For the computer of Example 4.8, determine the rate of
   ing at steady state consisting of a compressor, a heat exchanger,     entropy production, in W/K, when air exits at 32C. Ignore the
   and a turbine. Air enters the compressor with a mass flow rate        change in pressure between the inlet and exit.
   of 3.9 kg/s at 0.95 bar, 22C and exits the turbine at 0.95 bar,
   421C. Heat transfer to the air as it flows through the heat ex-    6.79 For the computer of Problem 4.70, determine the rate of
   changer occurs at an average temperature of 488C. The com-            entropy production, in kW/K, ignoring the change in pressure
   pressor and turbine operate adiabatically. Using the ideal gas        between the inlet and exit.
   model for the air, and neglecting kinetic and potential energy
   effects, determine the maximum theoretical value for the net       6.80 For the water-jacketed electronics housing of Problem
   power that can be developed by the power plant, in MW.                4.71, determine the rate of entropy production, in kW/K, when
                                                                         water exits at 26C.
                                        T = 488°C
                                                                      6.81 For the electronics-laden cylinder of Problem 4.73,
                        Heat exchanger                                   determine the rate of entropy production, in W/K, when air
                                                                         exits at 40C with a negligible change in pressure. Assume con-
Compressor                              Turbine                          vective cooling occurs on the outer surface of the cylinder in
                                                     W·net               accord with hA  3.4 W/K, where h is the heat transfer coef-
                                                                         ficient and A is the surface area. The temperature of the
         1                                        2                      surroundings away from the vicinity of the cylinder is 25C.

     Air at                                   Air at                  6.82 Steam enters a horizontal 15-cm-diameter pipe as a satu-
0.95 bar, 22°C                          0.95 bar, 421°C                  rated vapor at 5 bar with a velocity of 10 m/s and exits at 4.5 bar
 Figure P6.76                                                            with a quality of 95%. Heat transfer from the pipe to the
                                                                         surroundings at 300 K takes place at an average outer surface
6.77 Figure P6.77 shows a 30-ohm electrical resistor located             temperature of 400 K. For operation at steady state, determine
   in an insulated duct carrying a stream of air. At steady state,
   an electric current of 15 amp passes through the resistor, whose      (a) the velocity at the exit, in m/s.
   temperature remains constant at 127C.                                 (b) the rate of heat transfer from the pipe, in kW.
                                                                         (c) the rate of entropy production, in kW/K, for a control

                                                                             volume comprising only the pipe and its contents.
                                                                         (d) the rate of entropy production, in kW/K, for an enlarged

                                                                              control volume that includes the pipe and enough of its
                                                                              immediate surroundings so that heat transfer from the con-
                                                                              trol volume occurs at 300 K.

                                                                         Why do the answers of parts (c) and (d) differ?

                                                                      6.83 Steam enters a turbine operating at steady state at a
                                                                         pressure of 3 MPa, a temperature of 400C, and a velocity of
                                                                         160 m/s. Saturated vapor exits at 100C, with a velocity of
                                                                         100 m/s. Heat transfer from the turbine to its surroundings
                                                                                 Problems: Developing Engineering Skills 267

   takes place at the rate of 30 kJ per kg of steam at a location           stream with a flow rate of 4 kg/s and exits at 285 K, 0.98 atm.
   where the average surface temperature is 350 K.                          The heat exchanger is at steady state, and there is no appre-
                                                                            ciable heat transfer from its outer surface. Neglecting kinetic
   (a) For a control volume including only the turbine and its              and potential energy effects, determine the mass flow rate of
        contents, determine the work developed, in kJ, and the rate         the ammonia, in kg/s, and the rate of entropy production within
        at which entropy is produced, in kJ/K, each per kg of steam         the heat exchanger, in kW/K.
        flowing.
                                                                         6.88 A counterflow heat exchanger operates at steady state
   (b) The steam turbine of part (a) is located in a factory where          with negligible kinetic and potential energy effects. In one
        the ambient temperature is 27C. Determine the rate of en-           stream, liquid water enters at 15C and exits at 23C with a
        tropy production, in kJ/K per kg of steam flowing, for an           negligible change in pressure. In the other stream, Refrigerant
        enlarged control volume that includes the turbine and enough        22 enters at 12 bar, 90C with a mass flow rate of 150 kg/h
        of its immediate surroundings so that heat transfer takes place     and exits at 12 bar, 28C. Heat transfer from the outer surface
        from the control volume at the ambient temperature.                 of the heat exchanger can be ignored. Determine

   Explain why the entropy production value of part (b) differs             (a) the mass flow rate of the liquid water stream, in kg/h.
   from that calculated in part (a).                                        (b) the rate of entropy production within the heat exchanger,

6.84 Carbon dioxide (CO2) enters a nozzle operating at steady                    in kW/K.
   state at 28 bar, 267C, and 50 m /s. At the nozzle exit, the con-
   ditions are 1.2 bar, 67C, 580 m /s, respectively.                     6.89 Steam at 0.7 MPa, 355C enters an open feedwater heater
                                                                            operating at steady state. A separate stream of liquid water en-
   (a) For a control volume enclosing the nozzle only, determine            ters at 0.7 MPa, 35C. A single mixed stream exits as saturated
        the heat transfer, in kJ, and the change in specific entropy,       liquid at pressure p. Heat transfer with the surroundings and
        in kJ/K, each per kg of carbon dioxide flowing through the          kinetic and potential energy effects can be ignored.
        nozzle. What additional information would be required to
        evaluate the rate of entropy production?                            (a) If p  0.7 MPa, determine the ratio of the mass flow rates
                                                                                 of the incoming streams and the rate at which entropy is
   (b) Evaluate the rate of entropy production, in kJ/K per kg of                produced within the feedwater heater, in kJ/K per kg of
        carbon dioxide flowing, for an enlarged control volume                   liquid exiting.
        enclosing the nozzle and a portion of its immediate
        surroundings so that the heat transfer occurs at the ambi-          (b) Plot the quantities of part (a), each versus pressure p rang-
        ent temperature, 25C.                                                    ing from 0.6 to 0.7 MPa.

6.85 Air enters a compressor operating at steady state at 1 bar,         6.90 Air as an ideal gas flows through the compressor and heat
   22C with a volumetric flow rate of 1 m3/min and is com-                  exchanger shown in Fig. P6.90. A separate liquid water stream
   pressed to 4 bar, 177C. The power input is 3.5 kW. Employing             also flows through the heat exchanger. The data given are for
   the ideal gas model and ignoring kinetic and potential energy            operation at steady state. Stray heat transfer to the surround-
   effects, obtain the following results:                                   ings can be neglected, as can all kinetic and potential energy
                                                                            changes. Determine
   (a) For a control volume enclosing the compressor only, de-
        termine the heat transfer rate, in kW, and the change in            (a) the compressor power, in kW, and the mass flow rate of
        specific entropy from inlet to exit, in kJ/kg # K. What ad-              the cooling water, in kg/s.
        ditional information would be required to evaluate the rate
        of entropy production?                                              (b) the rates of entropy production, each in kW/K, for the com-
                                                                                 pressor and heat exchanger.
   (b) Calculate the rate of entropy production, in kW/K, for an
        enlarged control volume enclosing the compressor and a                      Compressor
        portion of its immediate surroundings so that heat trans-
        fer occurs at the ambient temperature, 22C.                                                  TA = 25°C  TB = 40°C
                                                                                                         Water     Water
6.86 Air is compressed in an axial-flow compressor operating                                             in        out
   at steady state from 27C, 1 bar to a pressure of 2.1 bar. The
   work input required is 94.6 kJ per kg of air flowing through          Air in  1
   the compressor. Heat transfer from the compressor occurs at
   the rate of 14 kJ per kg at a location on the compressor's surface                                (A)        (B)
   where the temperature is 40C. Kinetic and potential energy
   changes can be ignored. Determine                                     p1 = 96 kPa                    Heat
                                                                         T1 = 27°C                   exchanger
   (a) the temperature of the air at the exit, in C.                     (AV)1 = 26.91 m3/min
   (b) the rate at which entropy is produced within the com-
                                                                                                  2             3
        pressor, in kJ/K per kg of air flowing.
                                                                                    p2 = 230 kPa                T3 = 77°C
6.87 Ammonia enters a counterflow heat exchanger at 20C,                            T1 = 127°C                  p3 = p2
   with a quality of 35%, and leaves as saturated vapor at 20C.
   Air at 300 K, 1 atm enters the heat exchanger in a separate            Figure P6.90
268 Chapter 6 Using Entropy

6.91 Determine the rates of entropy production, each in kW/K,          6.98 Methane (CH4) undergoes an isentropic expansion from
   for the turbines and the heat exchanger of Problem 4.82. Place         an initial state where the temperature is 1000 K and the pres-
   these in rank order beginning with the component contribut-            sure is 5 bar to a final state where the temperature is T and the
   ing most to inefficient operation of the overall system.               pressure is p. Using the ideal gas model together with cp(T )
                                                                          from Table A-21, determine
6.92 Determine the rates of entropy production, each in kW/K,
   for the turbine, condenser, and pump of Problem 4.85. Place            (a) p when T  500 K
   these in rank order beginning with the component contribut-            (b) T when p  1 bar.
   ing most to inefficient operation of the overall system.               (c) Check the results of parts (a) and (b) using IT.

6.93 For the control volume of Example 4.12, determine the             6.99 An ideal gas with constant specific heat ratio k enters a
   amount of entropy produced during filling, in kJ/K. Repeat for         nozzle operating at steady state at pressure p1, temperature T1,
   the case where no work is developed by the turbine.                    and velocity V1. The air expands isentropically to a pressure
                                                                          of p2.
6.94 Steam is contained in a large vessel at 100 lbf/in.2, 450F.
   Connected to the vessel by a valve is an initially evacuated           (a) Develop an expression for the velocity at the exit, V2, in
   tank having a volume of 1 ft3. The valve is opened until the                terms of k, R, V1, T1, p1, and p2, only.
   tank is filled with steam at pressure p. The filling is adiabatic,
   kinetic and potential energy effects are negligible, and the state     (b) For V1  0, T1  1000 K, plot V2 versus p2p1 for selected
   of the large vessel remains constant.                                       values of k ranging from 1.2 to 1.4.

   (a) If p  100 lbf/in.2, determine the final temperature of the      6.100 An ideal gas undergoes a polytropic process from T1, p1
        steam within the tank, in F, and the amount of entropy            to a state where the temperature is T2.
        produced within the tank, in Btu/R.
                                                                          (a) Derive an expression for the change in specific entropy in
   (b) Plot the quantities of part (a) versus presssure p ranging              terms of n, R, T1, T2, s(T1), and s(T2).
        from 10 to 100 lbf/in.2
                                                                          (b) Using the result of part (a), develop an expression for n if
6.95 A well-insulated rigid tank of volume 10 m3 is connected                  s1  s2.
   by a valve to a large-diameter supply line carrying air at 227C
   and 10 bar. The tank is initially evacuated. Air is allowed to      6.101 A rigid well-insulated tank having a volume of 0.2 m3 is
   flow into the tank until the tank pressure is p. Using the ideal       filled initially with Refrigerant 134a vapor at a pressure of
   gas model with constant specific heat ratio k, plot tank tem-          10 bar and a temperature of 40C. A leak develops and refrig-
   perature, in K, the mass of air in the tank, in kg, and the amount     erant slowly escapes until the pressure within the tank becomes
   of entropy produced, in kJ/K, versus p in bar.                         1 bar. Determine

Using Isentropic Processes/Efficiencies                                   (a) the final temperature of the refrigerant within the tank, in C.
                                                                          (b) the amount of mass that exits the tank, in kg.
6.96 A piston­cylinder assembly initially contains 0.1 m3 of
   carbon dioxide gas at 0.3 bar and 400 K. The gas is compressed      6.102 A rigid tank is filled initially with 5.0 kg of air at a pres-
   isentropically to a state where the temperature is 560 K. Em-          sure of 0.5 MPa and a temperature of 500 K. The air is allowed
   ploying the ideal gas model and neglecting kinetic and poten-          to discharge through a turbine into the atmosphere, developing
   tial energy effects, determine the final pressure, in bar, and the     work until the pressure in the tank has fallen to the atmospheric
   work in kJ, using                                                      level of 0.1 MPa. Employing the ideal gas model for the air,
                                                                          determine the maximum theoretical amount of work that could
   (a) data from Table A-23.                                              be developed, in kJ. Ignore heat transfer with the atmosphere
   (b) IT                                                                 and changes in kinetic and potential energy.
   (c) a constant specific heat ratio from Table A-20 at the mean
                                                                       6.103 Air enters a 3600-kW turbine operating at steady state
       temperature, 480 K.                                                with a mass flow rate of 18 kg/s at 800C, 3 bar and a velocity
   (d) a constant specific heat ratio from Table A-20 at 300 K.           of 100 m/s. The air expands adiabatically through the turbine
                                                                          and exits at a velocity of 150 m/s. The air then enters a dif-
6.97 Air enters a turbine operating at steady state at 6 bar and          fuser where it is decelerated isentropically to a velocity of
   1100 K and expands isentropically to a state where the tem-            10 m/s and a pressure of 1 bar. Employing the ideal gas model,
   perature is 700 K. Employing the ideal gas model and ignoring          determine
   kinetic and potential energy changes, determine the pressure
   at the exit, in bar, and the work, in kJ per kg of air flowing,        (a) the pressure and temperature of the air at the turbine exit,
   using                                                                       in bar and C, respectively.

   (a) data from Table A-22.                                              (b) the rate of entropy production in the turbine, in kW/K.
   (b) IT.                                                                (c) Show the processes on a T­s diagram.
   (c) a constant specific heat ratio from Table A-20 at the mean
                                                                       6.104 Steam at 5 MPa and 600C enters an insulated turbine
       temperature, 900 K.                                                operating at steady state and exits as saturated vapor at
   (d) a constant specific heat ratio from Table A-20 at 300 K.           50 kPa. Kinetic and potential energy effects are negligible.
                                                                      Problems: Developing Engineering Skills 269

   Determine                                                             14 bar. The isentropic compressor efficiency is 75%. Heat
                                                                         transfer between the compressor and its surroundings can be
   (a) the work developed by the turbine, in kJ per kg of steam          ignored. Kinetic and potential energy effects are also negligi-
        flowing through the turbine.                                     ble. Determine

   (b) the isentropic turbine efficiency.                                (a) the exit temperature, in C.
                                                                         (b) the work input, in kJ per kg of refrigerant flowing.
6.105 Nitrogen (N2) at 3.8 atm and 170C enters an insulated
   turbine operating at steady state and expands to 1 atm. If the     6.111 Air enters an insulated compressor operating at steady
   isentropic turbine efficiency is 83.2%, determine the tempera-        state at 1 bar, 350 K with a mass flow rate of 1 kg/s and exits
   ture at the turbine exit, in C, using the ideal gas model for the     at 4 bar. The isentropic compressor efficiency is 82%. Deter-
   nitrogen and ignoring kinetic and potential energy changes.           mine the power input, in kW, and the rate of entropy produc-
                                                                         tion, in kW/K, using the ideal gas model with
6.106 Figure P6.106 provides steady-state operating data for a
   throttling valve in parallel with a steam turbine having an isen-     (a) data from Table A-22.
   tropic turbine efficiency of 90%. The streams exiting the valve       (b) IT.
   and the turbine mix in a mixing chamber. Heat transfer with           (c) a constant specific heat ratio, k  1.39.
   the surroundings and changes in kinetic and potential energy
   can be neglected. Determine                                        6.112 A compressor operating at steady state takes in atmos-
                                                                         pheric air at 20C, 1 bar at a rate of 1 kg/s and discharges air
   (a) the power developed by the turbine, in horsepower.                at 5 bar. Plot the power required, in kW, and the exit temper-
   (b) the mass flow rate through the valve, in lb/s.                    ature, in C, versus the isentropic compressor efficiency rang-
   (c) Locate the four numbered states on an h­s diagram.                ing from 70 to 100%. Assume the ideal gas model for the air
                                                                         and neglect heat transfer with the surroundings and changes in
                       t = 90%   3                                       kinetic and potential energy.
                        Turbine      p3 = 1 MPa
                                                                      6.113 In a gas turbine operating at steady state, air enters the
                    1            Mixing        4                         compressor with a mass flow rate of 5 kg/s at 0.95 bar and 22C
                                 chamber  p4 = 1 MPa                     and exits at 5.7 bar. The air then passes through a heat exchanger
p1 = 4 MPa                                T4 = 240°C                     before entering the turbine at 1100 K, 5.7 bar. Air exits the tur-
         = 360°C                                                         bine at 0.95 bar. The compressor and turbine operate adiabati-
Tm· 1 1  = 11 kg/s                                                       cally and kinetic and potential energy effects can be ignored.
                                                                         Determine the net power developed by the plant, in kW, if
                       Valve         p2 = 1 MPa
                                 2                                       (a) the compressor and turbine operate without internal irre-
                                                                              versibilities.
 Figure P6.106
                                                                         (b) the compressor and turbine isentropic efficiencies are 82
                                                                              and 85%, respectively.

6.107 Water vapor enters an insulated nozzle operating at steady      Analyzing Internally Reversible Flow Processes
   state at 0.7 MPa, 320C, 35 m/s and expands to 0.15 MPa. If
   the isentropic nozzle efficiency is 94%, determine the velocity    6.114 Air enters a compressor operating at steady state at 17C,
   at the exit, in m /s.                                                 1 bar and exits at a pressure of 5 bar. Kinetic and potential en-
                                                                         ergy changes can be ignored. If there are no internal irre-
6.108 Argon enters an insulated nozzle at 2.77 bar, 1300 K,              versibilities, evaluate the work and heat transfer, each in kJ per
   10 m/s and exits at 1 bar, 645 m/s. For steady-state operation,       kg of air flowing, for the following cases:
   determine
                                                                         (a) isothermal compression.
   (a) the exit temperature, in K.                                       (b) polytropic compression with n  1.3.
   (b) the isentropic nozzle efficiency.                                 (c) adiabatic compression.
   (c) the rate of entropy production, in kJ/K per kg of argon
                                                                         Sketch the processes on p­v and T­s coordinates and associ-
       flowing.                                                          ate areas on the diagrams with the work and heat transfer in
                                                                         each case. Referring to your sketches, compare for these cases
6.109 Air enters an insulated compressor operating at steady state       the magnitudes of the work, heat transfer, and final tempera-
   at 0.95 bar, 27C with a mass flow rate of 4000 kg/h and exits         tures, respectively.
   at 8.7 bar. Kinetic and potential energy effects are negligible.
                                                                      6.115 Air enters a compressor operating at steady state with a
   (a) Determine the minimum theoretical power input required,           volumetric flow rate of 8 m3/min at 23C, 0.12 MPa. The air
        in kW, and the corresponding exit temperature, in C.             is compressed isothermally without internal irreversibilities,
                                                                         exiting at 1.5 MPa. Kinetic and potential energy effects can be
   (b) If the exit temperature is 347C, determine the power in-          ignored. Evaluate the work required and the heat transfer, each
        put, in kW, and the isentropic compressor efficiency.            in kW.

6.110 Refrigerant 134a enters a compressor operating at steady
   state as saturated vapor at 4C and exits at a pressure of
270 Chapter 6 Using Entropy

6.116 Refrigerant 134a enters a compressor operating at steady            (a) the work required by the pump.
   state at 1.8 bar, 10C with a volumetric flow rate of 2.4               (b) the net work developed by the turbine.
   102 m3/s. The refrigerant is compressed to a pressure of 9 bar         (c) the heat transfer to the boiler.
   in an internally reversible process according to pv1.04  constant.
   Neglecting kinetic and potential energy effects, determine          6.120 As shown in Fig. P6.120, water flows from an elevated
                                                                          reservoir through a hydraulic turbine. The pipe diameter is con-
   (a) the power required, in kW.                                         stant, and operation is at steady state. Estimate the minimum
   (b) the rate of heat transfer, in kW.                                  mass flow rate, in kg/s, that would be required for a turbine power
                                                                          output of 1 MW. The local acceleration of gravity is 9.8 m/s2.
6.117 Compare the work required at steady state to compress
   water vapor isentropically to 3 MPa from the saturated vapor                        p1 = 1.3 bar
   state at 0.1 MPa to the work required to pump liquid water
   isentropically to 3 MPa from the saturated liquid state at          1               p2 = 1.0 bar
   0.1 MPa, each in kJ per kg of water flowing through the device.
   Kinetic and potential energy effects can be ignored.                     100 m                     ·
                                                                        Figure P6.120                Wt = 1 MW
6.118 An electrically-driven pump operating at steady state
   draws water from a pond at a pressure of 1 bar and a rate of                                              2 5m
   40 kg/s and delivers the water at a pressure of 4 bar. There is
   no significant heat transfer with the surroundings, and changes     6.121 A 5-kilowatt pump operating at steady state draws in
   in kinetic and potential energy can be neglected. The isentropic       liquid water at 1 bar, 15C and delivers it at 5 bar at an elevation
   pump efficiency is 80%. Evaluating electricity at 8 cents per          6 m above the inlet. There is no significant change in velocity
   kW # h, estimate the hourly cost of running the pump.                  between the inlet and exit, and the local acceleration of grav-
                                                                          ity is 9.8 m /s2. Would it be possible to pump 7.5 m3 in 10 min
6.119 Figure P6.119 shows three devices operating at steady               or less? Explain.
   state: a pump, a boiler, and a turbine. The turbine provides the
   power required to drive the pump and also supplies power to         6.122 A 4-kW pump operating at steady state draws in liquid
   other devices. For adiabatic operation of the pump and turbine,        water at 1 bar, 16C with a mass flow rate of 4.5 kg/s. There
   and ignoring kinetic and potential energy effects, determine,          are no significant kinetic and potential energy changes from
   in kJ per kg of steam flowing                                          inlet to exit and the local acceleration of gravity is 9.81 m /s2.
                                                                          Would it be possible for the pump to deliver water at a pres-
                                    ·                                     sure of 10 bar? Explain.
                                   Qin
                                                                       6.123 Carbon monoxide enters a nozzle operating at steady
2                            3                                            state at 5 bar, 200C, 1 m/s and undergoes a polytropic ex-
  8 bar                                                                   pansion to 1 bar with n  1.2. Using the ideal gas model and
                               8 bar,                                     ignoring potential energy effects, determine
         Boiler                saturated vapor
                                                                          (a) the exit velocity, in m/s.
                             Turbine  ·                                   (b) the rate of heat transfer between the gas and its surround-
                                      Wnet
                             t = 90%                                           ings, in kJ per kg of gas flowing.

            Pump                  4
            p = 70%
   1                         Steam
                             1 bar
Feedwater
1 bar, 30°C

 Figure P6.119

Design & Open Ended Problems: Exploring Engineering Practice

6.1D Of increasing interest today are turbines, pumps, and heat           irreversibilities related to heat transfer and friction on the de-
   exchangers that weigh less than 1 gram and have volumes of             sign and operation of micromachines.
   1 cubic centimeter or less. Although many of the same design
   considerations apply to such micromachines as to correspon-         6.2D The growth of living organisms has been studied and in-
   ding full-scale devices, others do not. Of particular interest to      terpreted thermodynamically by I. Prigogine and others, using
   designers is the impact of irreversibilities on the performance        the entropy and entropy production concepts. Write a paper
   of such tiny devices. Write a report discussing the influence of       summarizing the main findings of these investigations.
                                                                     Design & Open Ended Problems: Exploring Engineering Practice 271

6.3D The theoretical steam rate is the quantity of steam re-                 6.7D Water is to be pumped from a lake to a reservoir located
   quired to produce a unit amount of work in an ideal turbine.                 on a bluff 290 ft above. According to the specifications, the
   The Theoretical Steam Rate Tables published by The American                  piping is Schedule 40 steel pipe having a nominal diameter of
   Society of Mechanical Engineers give the theoretical steam rate              1 inch and the volumetric flow rate is 10 gal/min. The total
   in lb per kW # h. To determine the actual steam rate, the theo-              length of pipe is 580 ft. A centrifugal pump is specified. Esti-
   retical steam rate is divided by the isentropic turbine efficiency.          mate the electrical power required by the pump, in kW. Is a
   Why is the steam rate a significant quantity? Discuss how the                centrifugal pump a good choice for this application? What pre-
   steam rate is used in practice.                                              cautions should be taken to avoid cavitation?

6.4D Figure P6.4D illustrates an ocean thermal energy conver-                6.8D Elementary thermodynamic modeling, including the use
                                                                                of the temperature­entropy diagram for water and a form of the
sion (OTEC) power plant that generates power by exploiting                      Bernoulli equation has been employed to study certain types of
                                                                                volcanic eruptions. (See L. G. Mastin, "Thermodynamics of
the naturally occurring decrease of the temperature of ocean                    Gas and Steam-Blast Eruptions," Bull. Volcanol., 57, 85­98,
                                                                                1995.) Write a report critically evaluating the underlying
water with depth. Warm surface water enters the evaporator                      assumptions and application of thermodynamic principles, as
                                     #                                          reported in the article.
with      a   mass  flow  rate  of  mw  at   temperature  Tw     28C  and
                                                                             6.9D An inventor claims to have conceived of a second law-
exits     at  T1    Tw.   Cool  water   brought  from  a  depth  of  600  m     challenging heat engine. (See H. Apsden, "The Electronic Heat
                                                            #                   Engine," Proceedings 27th International Energy Conversion
enters the condenser with a mass flow rate of mc at tempera-                    Engineering Conference, 4.357­4.363, 1992. Also see U.S.
                                                                                Patent No. 5,101,632.) By artfully using mirrors the heat en-
ture Tc  5C and exits at T2  Tc. The pumps for the ocean                        gine would "efficiently convert abundant environmental heat
                                                                                energy at the ambient temperature to electricity." Write a pa-
water flows and other auxiliary equipment typically require                     per explaining the principles of operation of the device. Does
                                                                                this invention actually challenge the second law of thermody-
15% of the gross power generated. Estimate the mass flow rates                  namics? Does it have commercial promise? Discuss.
#             #
mw and mc, in kg/s, for a desired net power output of 125 MW.                6.10D Noting that contemporary economic theorists often draw
                                                                                on principles from mechanics such as conservation of energy
T1                                  m· w, Tw                                    to explain the workings of economies, N. Georgescu-Roegen
                                                                                and like-minded economists have called for the use of princi-
                  Evaporator                                                    ples from thermodynamics in economics. According to this
                                                                                view, entropy and the second law of thermodynamics are
                                    Turbine                                     relevant for assessing not only the exploitation of natural re-
                                                                                sources for industrial and agricultural production but also the
          Pump                                                                  impact on the natural environment of wastes from such pro-
                                                                                duction. Write a paper in which you argue for, or against, the
                  Condenser                                                     proposition that thermodynamics is relevant to the field of
                                                                                economics.
m· c, Tc                            T2            Figure P6.4D
                                                                             6.11D Roll Over Boltzman (see box Sec. 6.5). The new sta-
6.5D How might the principal sources of irreversibility be re-                  tistical definition of entropy is said to give insights about
   duced for the heat pump components analyzed in Example 6.8?                  physical systems verging on chaos. Investigate what is meant
   Carefully consider the effects of a change in any one compo-                 by chaos in this context. Write a report including at least three
   nent on the performance of each of the others and on the heat                references.
   pump as a whole. Consider the economic consequences of pro-
   posed changes. Summarize your findings in a memorandum.                   6.12D Star Guides Consumer Choices (see box Sec. 6.8).
                                                                                Using the ENERGY STAR® Home Improvement Toolbox, ob-
6.6D The Bernoulli equation can be generalized to include the                   tain a rank-ordered list of the top three cost-effective im-
   effects of fluid friction in piping networks in terms of the con-            provements that would enhance the overall energy efficiency
   cept of head loss. Investigate the head loss formulation as it               of your home. Develop a plan to implement the improvements.
   applies to incompressible flows through common pipes and fit-                Write a report including at least three references.
   tings. Using this information, estimate the head, in ft, a booster
   pump would need to overcome because of friction in a 2-in.
   galvanized steel pipe feeding water to the top floor of a 20-story
   building.
                C   Exergy Analysis
                H
                A
                P
                T

7E
                R

chapter objective   E N G I N E E R I N G C O N T E X T The objective of this chapter is to
                    introduce exergy analysis, a method that uses the conservation of mass and conservation
                    of energy principles together with the second law of thermodynamics for the design and
                    analysis of thermal systems. Another term frequently used to identify exergy analysis is
                    availability analysis.

                       The importance of developing thermal systems that make effective use of nonrenewable
                    resources such as oil, natural gas, and coal is apparent. The method of exergy analysis is
                    particularly suited for furthering the goal of more efficient resource use, since it enables the
                    locations, types, and true magnitudes of waste and loss to be determined. This information
                    can be used to design thermal systems, guide efforts to reduce sources of inefficiency in
                    existing systems, and evaluate system economics.

        7.1 Introducing Exergy

                                Energy is conserved in every device or process. It cannot be destroyed. Energy entering a
                                system with fuel, electricity, flowing streams of matter, and so on can be accounted for in
                                the products and by-products. However, the energy conservation idea alone is inadequate for
                                depicting some important aspects of resource utilization.

                                     for example. . . Figure 7.1a shows an isolated system consisting initially of a small
                                container of fuel surrounded by air in abundance. Suppose the fuel burns (Fig. 7.1b) so that
                                finally there is a slightly warm mixture of combustion products and air as shown in Fig. 7.1c.
                                Although the total quantity of energy associated with the system would be unchanged, the
                                initial fuel­air combination would have a greater economic value and be intrinsically more
                                useful than the final warm mixture. For instance, the fuel might be used in some device to
                                generate electricity or produce superheated steam, whereas the uses to which the slightly
                                warm combustion products can be put would be far more limited in scope. We might say that
                                the system has a greater potential for use initially than it has finally. Since nothing but a final
                                warm mixture would be achieved in the process, this potential would be largely wasted. More
                                precisely, the initial potential would be largely destroyed because of the irreversible nature
                                of the process. 

272
                                                                                                   7.2 Defining Exergy 273

        Boundary of the        Air and combustion
        isolated system        products at
                               temperature Ti + dT
Air at temperature
         Ti

Fuel                     Fuel

          (a)            (b)                                      (c)
 Figure 7.1
                         Time
                               Energy quantity constant
                                     Potential for use decreases

               Illustration used to introduce exergy.

Anticipating the main results of this chapter, we can read exergy as potential for use
wherever it appears in the text. The foregoing example illustrates that, unlike energy,
exergy is not conserved.

   Subsequent discussion shows that exergy not only can be destroyed by irreversibilities but
also can be transferred to a system or from a system, as in losses accompanying heat trans-
fers to the surroundings. Improved resource utilization can be realized by reducing exergy
destruction within a system and/or losses. An objective in exergy analysis is to identify sites
where exergy destructions and losses occur and rank order them for significance. This allows
attention to be centered on the aspects of system operation that offer the greatest opportunities
for improvement.

7.2 Defining Exergy                                                                                exergy reference
                                                                                                   environment
The basis for the exergy concept is present in the introduction to the second law provided in
Chap. 5. A principal conclusion of Sec. 5.1 is that an opportunity exists for doing work when-     exergy
ever two systems at different states are brought into communication. In principle, work can
be developed as the systems are allowed to come into equilibrium. When one of the two sys-
tems is a suitably idealized system called an exergy reference environment or simply, an
environment, and the other is some system of interest, exergy is the maximum theoretical
work obtainable as they interact to equilibrium.

    The definition of exergy will not be complete, however, until we define the reference
environment and show how numerical values for exergy can be determined. These tasks are
closely related because the numerical value of exergy depends on the state of a system of
interest, as well as the condition of the environment.

 7.2.1 Exergy Reference Environment

Any system, whether a component of a larger system such as a steam turbine in a power
plant or the larger system itself (power plant), operates within surroundings of some kind. It
is important to distinguish between the environment used for calculating exergy and a sys-
tem's surroundings. Strictly speaking, the term surroundings refers to everything not included
in the system. However, when considering the exergy concept, we distinguish between the
274 Chapter 7 Exergy Analysis

                                        Environment ­ Intensive properties of this portion
                                                           of the surroundings are not affected
                                                           by any process within the power plant
                                                           or its immediate surroundings

       Stack  Immediate surroundings­intensive                                                           Delineates the     Power
       gases  properties may vary in interactions                                                        immediate plant
              with power plant                                                                           surroundings from
Fuel                                                                                                     the environment
Air                  Boundary of plant
                                                                                                  River or other body
                                                     Power                                        of water ­ the portion
                                                                                                  not interacting with
Cooling water out  Cooling water in                                                               the power plant would
                                                                                                  be in the environment

 Figure 7.2 Schematic of a power plant and its surroundings.

immediate surroundings, where intensive properties may vary during interactions with the
system, and the larger portion of the surroundings at a distance, where the intensive proper-
ties are unaffected by any process involving the system and its immediate surroundings. The
term environment identifies this larger portion of the surroundings.

    for example. . . Fig. 7.2 illustrates the distinction between a system consisting
of a power plant, its immediate surroundings, and the environment. In this case, the
environment includes portions of the surrounding atmosphere and the river at a distance
from the power plant. Interactions between the power plant and its immediate surround-
ings have no influence on the temperature, pressure, or other intensive properties of the
environment. 

MODELING THE ENVIRONMENT

The physical world is complicated, and to include every detail in an analysis is not practical.
Accordingly, in describing the environment, simplifications are made and a model results.
The validity and utility of an analysis using any model are, of course, restricted by the
idealizations made in formulating the model. In this book the environment is regarded to
be a simple compressible system that is large in extent and uniform in temperature, T0, and
pressure, p0. In keeping with the idea that the environment represents a portion of the
physical world, the values for both p0 and T0 used throughout a particular analysis are nor-
mally taken as typical environmental conditions, such as 1 atm and 25C. The intensive
properties of each phase of the environment are uniform and do not change significantly
as a result of any process under consideration. The environment is also regarded as free of
irreversibilities. All significant irreversibilities are located within the system and its imme-
diate surroundings.

   Although its intensive properties do not change, the environment can experience changes
in its extensive properties as a result of interactions with other systems. Changes in the
extensive properties internal energy Ue, entropy Se, and volume Ve of the environment are
                                                                                                 7.2 Defining Exergy 275

related through the first T dS equation, Eq. 6.10. Since T0 and p0 are constant, Eq. 6.10 takes
the form

                             ˘Ue  T0 ˘Se  p0 ˘Ve                            (7.1)

In this chapter kinetic and potential energies are evaluated relative to the environment, all
parts of which are considered to be at rest with respect to one another. Accordingly, as indi-
cated by the foregoing equation, a change in the energy of the environment can be a change
in its internal energy only. Equation 7.1 is used below to develop an expression for evaluat-
ing exergy. In Chap. 13 the environment concept is extended to allow for the possibility of
chemical reactions, which are excluded from the present considerations.

 7.2.2 Dead State

Let us consider next the concept of the dead state, which is also important in completing our    dead state
understanding of the property exergy.

   If the state of a fixed quantity of matter, a closed system, departs from that of the envi-
ronment, an opportunity exists for developing work. However, as the system changes state
toward that of the environment, the opportunity diminishes, ceasing to exist when the two
are in equilibrium with one another. This state of the system is called the dead state. At the
dead state, the fixed quantity of matter under consideration is imagined to be sealed in an
envelope impervious to mass flow, at rest relative to the environment, and internally in equi-
librium at the temperature T0 and pressure p0 of the environment. At the dead state, both the
system and environment possess energy, but the value of exergy is zero because there is no
possibility of a spontaneous change within the system or the environment, nor can there be
an interaction between them.

   With the introduction of the concepts of environment and dead state, we are in a position
to show how a numerical value can be determined for exergy. This is considered next.

 7.2.3 Evaluating Exergy
The exergy of a system, E, at a specified state is given by the expression

                  E  1E  U02  p01V  V02  T01S  S02                          (7.2)  exergy of a system

          Closed               Wc
          system
                             Boundary of
System    Heat and work      the combined
boundary  interactions with  system.
          the environment
                                                Figure 7.3 Combined system
Environment at T0, p0                          of closed system and environment.
276 Chapter 7 Exergy Analysis

METHODOLOGY                    where E( U  KE  PE), V, and S denote, respectively, the energy, volume, and entropy
UPDATE                         of the system, and U0, V0, and S0 are the values of the same properties if the system were
                               at the dead state. By inspection of Eq. 7.2, the units of exergy are seen to be the same as
In this book, E and e are      those of energy. Equation 7.2 can be derived by applying energy and entropy balances to
used for exergy and            the combined system shown in Fig. 7.3, which consists of a closed system and an environ-
specific exergy, respec-       ment. (See box).
tively, while E and e
denote energy and specific         E VA L UAT I N G T H E E X E R G Y O F A SYST E M
energy, respectively. Such
notation is in keeping with       Referring to Fig. 7.3, exergy is the maximum theoretical work that could be done by
standard practice. The            the combined system if the closed system were to come into equilibrium with the en-
appropriate concept,              vironment--that is, if the closed system passed to the dead state. Since the objective
exergy or energy, will be         is to evaluate the maximum work that could be developed by the combined system, the
clear in context. Still, care     boundary of the combined system is located so that the only energy transfers across it
is required to avoid              are work transfers of energy. This ensures that the work developed by the combined
mistaking the symbols for         system is not affected by heat transfer to or from it. Moreover, although the volumes
these concepts.                   of the closed system and the environment can vary, the boundary of the combined sys-
                                  tem is located so that the total volume of the combined system remains constant. This
                                  ensures that the work developed by the combined system is fully available for lifting
                                  a weight in its surroundings, say, and is not expended in merely displacing the sur-
                                  roundings of the combined system. Let us now apply an energy balance to evaluate the
                                  work developed by the combined system.

                               ENERGY BALANCE. An energy balance for the combined system reduces to

                               0

                               ˘Ec  Qc  Wc                                                           (7.3)

                               where Wc is the work developed by the combined system, and ˘Ec is the energy change
                               of the combined system, equal to the sum of the energy changes of the closed system
                               and the environment. The energy of the closed system initially is denoted by E, which
                               includes the kinetic energy, potential energy, and internal energy of the system. Since
                               the kinetic energy and potential energy are evaluated relative to the environment, the
                               energy of the closed system when at the dead state would be just its internal energy,
                               U0. Accordingly, ˘Ec can be expressed as

                               ˘Ec  1U0  E2  ˘Ue

                               Using Eq. 7.1 to replace ˘Ue, the expression becomes

                               ˘Ec  1U0  E2  1T0 ˘Se  p0 ˘Ve2                                        (7.4)

                               Substituting Eq. 7.4 into Eq. 7.3 and solving for Wc gives

                               Wc  1E  U02  1T0 ˘Se  p0 ˘Ve2

                               As noted previously, the total volume of the combined system is constant. Hence, the

                               change in volume of the environment is equal in magnitude but opposite in sign to
                               the volume change of the closed system: Ve  (V0  V ).With this substitution, the
                               above expression for work becomes

                               Wc  1E  U02  p01V  V02  T0 ˘Se                                        (7.5)

                               This equation gives the work developed by the combined system as the closed sys-
                               tem passes to the dead state while interacting only with the environment. The maxi-
                               mum theoretical value for the work is determined using the entropy balance as follows.
                                                                                              7.2 Defining Exergy 277

ENTROPY BALANCE. The entropy balance for the combined system reduces to give

˘Sc  sc

where the entropy transfer term is omitted because no heat transfer takes place across
the boundary of the combined system, and sc accounts for entropy production due to
irreversibilities as the closed system comes into equilibrium with the environment. ˘Sc
is the entropy change of the combined system, equal to the sum of the entropy changes
for the closed system and environment, respectively,

                                      ˘Sc  1S0  S2  ˘Se

where S and S0 denote the entropy of the closed system at the given state and the dead
state, respectively. Combining the last two equations

1S0  S2  ˘Se  sc                                     (7.6)

Eliminating ˘Se between Eqs. 7.5 and 7.6 results in

Wc  1E  U02  p01V  V02  T01S  S02  T0sc              (7.7)

The value of the underlined term in Eq. 7.7 is determined by the two end states of the
closed system--the given state and the dead state--and is independent of the details
of the process linking these states. However, the value of the term T0sc depends on the
nature of the process as the closed system passes to the dead state. In accordance with
the second law, T0sc is positive when irreversibilities are present and vanishes in the
limiting case where there are no irreversibilities. The value of T0sc cannot be negative.
Hence, the maximum theoretical value for the work of the combined system is obtained
by setting T0sc to zero in Eq. 7.7. By definition, the extensive property exergy, E, is
this maximum value. Accordingly, Eq. 7.2 is seen to be the appropriate expression for
evaluating exergy.

 7.2.4 Exergy Aspects                                                                            E
                                                                                                    Constant-
In this section, we consider several important aspects of the exergy concept, beginning with        exergy line
the following:
                                                                                                                 p
 Exergy is a measure of the departure of the state of a system from that of the environ-
   ment. It is therefore an attribute of the system and environment together. However, once   T  E = 0 at
   the environment is specified, a value can be assigned to exergy in terms of property
   values for the system only, so exergy can be regarded as a property of the system.            T0, p0

 The value of exergy cannot be negative. If a system were at any state other than the
   dead state, the system would be able to change its condition spontaneously toward the
   dead state; this tendency would cease when the dead state was reached. No work must
   be done to effect such a spontaneous change. Accordingly, any change in state of the
   system to the dead state can be accomplished with at least zero work being developed,
   and thus the maximum work (exergy) cannot be negative.

 Exergy is not conserved but is destroyed by irreversibilities. A limiting case is when
   exergy is completely destroyed, as would occur if a system were permitted to undergo a
   spontaneous change to the dead state with no provision to obtain work. The potential to
   develop work that existed originally would be completely wasted in such a spontaneous
   process.
278 Chapter 7 Exergy Analysis

                    Exergy has been viewed thus far as the maximum theoretical work obtainable from
                      the combined system of system plus environment as a system passes from a given
                      state to the dead state while interacting with the environment only. Alternatively,
                      exergy can be regarded as the magnitude of the minimum theoretical work input
                      required to bring the system from the dead state to the given state. Using energy and
                      entropy balances as above, we can readily develop Eq. 7.2 from this viewpoint. This
                      is left as an exercise.

                      Although exergy is an extensive property, it is often convenient to work with it on a unit
                   mass or molar basis. The specific exergy on a unit mass basis, e, is given by

                               e  1e  u02  p01v  v02  T01s  s02               (7.8)

                   where e, v, and s are the specific energy, volume, and entropy, respectively, at a given

                   state; u0, v0, and s0 are the same specific properties evaluated at the dead state. With e 
                   u  V 22  gz,

                               e  3 1u  V22  gz2  u0 4  p01v  v02  T01s  s02

                   and the expression for the specific exergy becomes

specific exergy                e  1u  u02  p01v  v02  T01s  s02  V22  gz      (7.9)

                   By inspection, the units of specific exergy are the same as those of specific energy. Also note
                   that the kinetic and potential energies measured relative to the environment contribute their
                   full values to the exergy magnitude, for in principle each could be completely converted to
                   work were the system brought to rest at zero elevation relative to the environment.

                      Using Eq. 7.2, we can determine the change in exergy between two states of a closed
                   system as the difference

exergy change                  E2  E1  1E2  E12  p01V2  V12  T01S2  S12       (7.10)

                   where the values of p0 and T0 are determined by the state of the environment.
                      When a system is at the dead state, it is in thermal and mechanical equilibrium with the

                   environment, and the value of exergy is zero. We might say more precisely that the therm-
                   omechanical contribution to exergy is zero. This modifying term distinguishes the exergy
                   concept of the present chapter from a more general concept introduced in Sec. 13.6, where
                   the contents of a system at the dead state are permitted to enter into chemical reaction with
                   environmental components and in so doing develop additional work. As illustrated by
                   subsequent discussions, the thermomechanical exergy concept suffices for a wide range of
                   thermodynamic evaluations.

                    7.2.5 Illustrations

                   We conclude this introduction to the exergy concept with examples showing how to calculate
                   exergy and exergy change. To begin, observe that the exergy of a system at a specified state
                   requires properties at that state and at the dead state.  for example. . . let us use Eq. 7.9
                   to determine the specific exergy of saturated water vapor at 120C, having a velocity of
                   30 m/s and an elevation of 6 m, each relative to an exergy reference environment where
                   T0  298 K (25C), p0  1 atm, and g  9.8 m/s2. For water as saturated vapor at 120C,
                   Table A-2 gives v  0.8919 m3/kg, u  2529.3 kJ/kg, s  7.1296 kJ/kg # K. At the dead state,
                   where T0  298 K (25C) and p0  1 atm, water is a liquid. Thus, with Eqs. 3.11, 3.12, and
                                                                                                           7.2 Defining Exergy 279

6.7 and values from Table A-2, we get v0  1.0029  103 m3/kg, u0  104.88 kJ/kg, s0                                 Saturated
0.3674 kJ/kg # K. Substituting values                                                                             vapor at 120°C

                                                              V2                                                            30 m/s
                                                              2
e    1u    u02     p01v      v02        T01s          s02                 gz

    c 12529.3  104.882 kJ d                                                                                   6m
                               kg

         c a1.01325      105  N   b  1  0.8919           1.0029           1032  m3 d     `     1 kJ  m  `
                              m2                                                kg          103 N #

         c 1298  K2 17.1296       0.36742       kJ         d                                               z      p0 = 1 atm
                                              kg # K
                                                                                                                  gT0==92.898mK/s2

          130 m /s22     a9.8  m   b    16  m2  d  `  1    1  N   /s2  `  `     1 kJ  m  `
         c                     s2                        kg   #m             103 N #

               2

    12424.42  90.27  2015.14  0.45  0.062 kJ  500 kJ 
                                                                          kg             kg

   The following example illustrates the use of Eq. 7.9 together with ideal gas property
data.

E X A M P L E 7 . 1 Exergy of Exhaust Gas

A cylinder of an internal combustion engine contains 2450 cm3 of gaseous combustion products at a pressure of 7 bar
and a temperature of 867C just before the exhaust valve opens. Determine the specific exergy of the gas, in kJ/kg. Ig-
nore the effects of motion and gravity, and model the combustion products as air as an ideal gas. Take T0  300 K (27C)
and p0  1.013 bar.

SOLUTION

Known: Gaseous combustion products at a specified state are contained in the cylinder of an internal combustion
engine.

Find: Determine the specific exergy.

Schematic and Given Data:

2450 cm3 of air       Assumptions:
at 7 bar, 867°C
                      1. The gaseous combustion products are a closed system.
                      2. The combustion products are modeled as air as an ideal gas.
                      3. The effects of motion and gravity can be ignored.
                      4. T0  300 K (27C) and p0  1.013 bar.

                                        Figure E7.1

Analysis: With assumption 3, Eq. 7.9 becomes
                                                    e  u  u0  p01v  v02  T01s  s02
280 Chapter 7 Exergy Analysis

  The internal energy and entropy terms are evaluated using data from Table A-22, as follows:

                               u  u0  880.35  214.07
                                         666.28 kJ/kg

                               s    s0    s°1T 2    s°1T02    R          ln  p
                                                              M              p0

                                         3.11883  1.70203  a 8.314b ln a 7 b
                                                                         28.97 1.013

                                         0.8621 kJ/kg # K

                               T01s  s02  1300 K2 10.8621 kJ/kg # K2
                                             258.62 kJ/kg

  The p0(v  v0) term is evaluated using the ideal gas equation of state: v  (RM)Tp and v0  (RM)T0p0, so

                                  p01v    v02     R a p0T     T0b
                                                  Mp

                                                8.314 c 11.0132 111402  300 d
                                                  28.97          7

                                                38.75 kJ/kg

  Substituting values into the above expression for the specific exergy

                                        e  666.28  138.752  258.62

                                           368.91 kJ/kg

   If the gases are discharged directly to the surroundings, the potential for developing work quantified by the exergy value

      determined in the solution is wasted. However, by venting the gases through a turbine some work could be developed.

      This principle is utilized by the turbochargers added to some internal combustion engines.

   The next example emphasizes the fundamentally different characters of exergy and energy,
while illustrating the use of Eqs. 7.9 and 7.10.

  E X A M P L E 7 . 2 Comparing Exergy and Energy

  Refrigerant 134a, initially a saturated vapor at 28C, is contained in a rigid, insulated vessel. The vessel is fitted with a pad-
  dle wheel connected to a pulley from which a mass is suspended. As the mass descends a certain distance, the refrigerant is
  stirred until it attains a state where the pressure is 1.4 bar. The only significant changes of state are experienced by the sus-
  pended mass and the refrigerant. The mass of refrigerant is 1.11 kg. Determine

  (a) the initial exergy, final exergy, and change in exergy of the refrigerant, each in kJ.
  (b) the change in exergy of the suspended mass, in kJ.
  (c) the change in exergy of an isolated system of the vessel and pulley­mass assembly, in kJ.
  Discuss the results obtained, and compare with the respective energy changes. Let T0  293 K (20C), p0  1 bar.

  SOLUTION

  Known: Refrigerant 134a in a rigid, insulated vessel is stirred by a paddle wheel connected to a pulley­mass assembly.

  Find: Determine the initial and final exergies and the change in exergy of the refrigerant, the change in exergy of the sus-
  pended mass, and the change in exergy of the isolated system, all in kJ. Discuss the results obtained.
                                                                                                                   7.2 Defining Exergy 281

  Schematic and Given Data:

                                             Isolated system
                                             Q=W=0

        Refrigerant 134a                                                 T                                         1.4 bar
        mR = 1.11 kg                                                                Saturated
                                                                                    vapor
            Initially, saturated
            vapor at ­28°C.                                                                                2       1.0 bar
            p2 = 1.4 bar
                                             mass initially                                                      0 0.93 bar

                                                                    20°C

                                                                  ­28°C                                               Dead
                                                                                                                      state
                                  z          mass finally                                                    1
        T0 = 293 K, p0 = 1 bar
                                                                                                                            v

                                                                                                                                  Figure E7.2

  Assumptions:

  1. As shown in the schematic, three systems are under consideration: the refrigerant, the suspended mass, and an isolated sys-
  tem consisting of the vessel and pulley­mass assembly. For the isolated system Q  0, W  0.
  2. The only significant changes of state are experienced by the refrigerant and the suspended mass. For the refrigerant, there
  is no change in kinetic or potential energy. For the suspended mass, there is no change in kinetic or internal energy. Elevation
  is the only intensive property of the suspended mass that changes.
  3. For the environment, T0  293 K (20C), p0  1 bar.

  Analysis:

  (a) The initial and final exergies of the refrigerant can be evaluated using Eq. 7.9. From assumption 2, it follows that for the
  refrigerant there are no significant effects of motion or gravity, and thus the exergy at the initial state is

                                         E1  mR 3 1u1  u02  p01v1  v02  T01s1  s02 4

  The initial and final states of the refrigerant are shown on the accompanying T­v diagram. From Table A-10, u1  ug(28C) 
  211.29 kJ/kg. v1  vg(28C)  0.2052 m3/kg, s1  sg(28C)  0.9411 kJ/kg # K. From Table A-12 at 1 bar, 20C, u0 
  246.67 kJ/kg, v0  0.23349 m3/kg, s0  1.0829 kJ/kg # K. Then

  E1    1.11  kg  c  1211.29    246.672  kJ    a105      N   b  10.2052    0.233492  m3  `     1 kJ  m  `     293  K10.9411      1.08292    kJ    d
                                         kg              m2                          kg     103 N #                                       kg # K

       1.11 kg 3 135.382  12.832  141.552 4 kJ  3.7 kJ
                                                            kg

      The final state of the refrigerant is fixed by p2  1.4 bar and v2  v1. Interpolation in Table A-12 gives u2  300.16 kJ/kg,
  s2  1.2369 kJ/kg # K. Then

                                     E2      1.11  kg 3  153.492    12.832    145.122 4        kJ       6.1  kJ
                                                                                               kg

  For the refrigerant, the change in exergy is

                                         1 ˘E2refrigerant  E2  E1  6.1 kJ  3.7 kJ  2.4 kJ

  The exergy of the refrigerant increases as it is stirred.
282 Chapter 7 Exergy Analysis

(b) With assumption 2, Eq. 7.10 reduces to give the exergy change for the suspended mass

                                     0            0     0  0

                                  1 ˘E2mass  1 ˘U  p0˘V  T0˘S  ˘KE  ˘PE2mass

                                      1 ˘PE2mass

     Thus, the exergy change for the suspended mass equals its change in potential energy.

 The change in potential energy of the suspended mass is obtained from an energy balance for the isolated system as fol-

     lows: The change in energy of the isolated system is the sum of the energy changes of the refrigerant and suspended mass.

     There is no heat transfer or work, and with assumption 2 we have

                               0  0                  0                                         0  0           0

1 ˘KE  ˘PE  ˘U 2refrigerant  1 ˘KE  ˘PE  ˘U 2mass  Q  W

Solving for (PE)mass and using previously determined values for the specific internal energy of the refrigerant

                                              1 ˘PE2mass  1 ˘U2refrigerant
                                                            11.11 kg2 1300.16  211.292 a kJ b
                                                                                                     kg
                                                            98.6 kJ

Collecting results, (E)mass  98.6 kJ. The exergy of the mass decreases because its elevation decreases.
(c) The change in exergy of the isolated system is the sum of the exergy changes of the refrigerant and suspended mass. With
the results of parts (a) and (b)

                                                       1 ˘E2isol  1 ˘E2refrigerant  1 ˘E2mass
                                                                  12.4 kJ2  198.6 kJ2
                                                                  96.2 kJ

The exergy of the isolated system decreases.

    To summarize

Refrigerant                             Energy Change                                          Exergy Change
Suspended mass
                                           98.6 kJ                                                 2.4 kJ
Isolated system                            98.6 kJ                                                98.6 kJ
                                                                                                  96.2 kJ
                                               0.0 kJ

 For the isolated system there is no net change in energy. The increase in the internal energy of the refrigerant equals the

     decrease in potential energy of the suspended mass. However, the increase in exergy of the refrigerant is much less than the

     decrease in exergy of the mass. For the isolated system, exergy decreases because stirring destroys exergy.

    Exergy is a measure of the departure of the state of the system from that of the environment. At all states, E  0. This ap-

 plies when T  T0 and p  p0, as at state 2, and when T  T0 and p  p0, as at state 1.

    The exergy change of the refrigerant can be determined more simply with Eq. 7.10, which requires dead state property

 values only for T0 and p0. With the approach used in part (a), values for u0, v0, and s0 are also required.

    The change in potential energy of the suspended mass, (PE)mass, cannot be determined from Eq. 2.10 (Sec. 2.1) since the

 mass and change in elevation are unknown. Moreover, for the suspended mass as the system, (PE)mass cannot be obtained

    from an energy balance without first evaluating the work. Thus, we resort here to an energy balance for the isolated system,

    which does not require such information.

    As the suspended mass descends, energy is transferred by work through the paddle wheel to the refrigerant, and the re-

 frigerant state changes. Since the exergy of the refrigerant increases, we infer that an exergy transfer accompanies the work

    interaction. The concepts of exergy change, exergy transfer, and exergy destruction are related by the closed system exergy

    balance introduced in the next section.
                                                                                                                 7.3 Closed System Exergy Balance 283

7.3 Closed System Exergy Balance

A system at a given state can attain a new state through work and heat interactions with its
surroundings. Since the exergy value associated with the new state would generally differ
from the value at the initial state, transfers of exergy across the system boundary can be in-
ferred to accompany heat and work interactions. The change in exergy of a system during a
process would not necessarily equal the net exergy transferred, for exergy would be destroyed
if irreversibilities were present within the system during the process. The concepts of exergy
change, exergy transfer, and exergy destruction are related by the closed system exergy bal-
ance introduced in this section. The exergy balance concept is extended to control volumes
in Sec. 7.5. These balances are expressions of the second law of thermodynamics and provide
the basis for exergy analysis.

 7.3.1 Developing the Exergy Balance

The exergy balance for a closed system is developed by combining the closed system energy
and entropy balances. The forms of the energy and entropy balances used in the develop-
ment are, respectively

                       2

                E2  E1  dQ  W

                                        1

                 S2  S1       2 a dQ b  s
                              1 Tb

where W and Q represent, respectively, work and heat transfers between the system and its

surroundings. These interactions do not necessarily involve the environment. In the entropy
balance, Tb denotes the temperature on the system boundary where Q is received and the
term  accounts for entropy produced by internal irreversibilities.

   As the first step in deriving the exergy balance, multiply the entropy balance by the tem-

perature T0 and subtract the resulting expression from the energy balance to obtain

                             2                          2  adQb
                                                       1     Tb
                              dQ  T0

                            1
  1E2  E12  T01S2  S12                                                 W    T0s

Collecting the terms involving Q and introducing Eq. 7.10 on the left side, we can rewrite
this expression as

 1E2  E12  p01V2  V12          2  a1                   T0 b  dQ     W     T0s
                              1                        Tb

Rearranging, the closed system exergy balance results

 E2  E1  2  a1    T0 b  dQ    3W       p01V2                 V12 4          T0s     (7.11)  closed system
        1         Tb
                                                                                               exergy balance
exergy                      exergy                                        exergy

change                      transfers                                  destruction

Since Eq. 7.11 is obtained by deduction from the energy and entropy balances, it is not an
independent result, but it can be used in place of the entropy balance as an expression of the
second law.
284 Chapter 7 Exergy Analysis

                                      INTERPRETING THE EXERGY BALANCE

                                For specified end states and given values of p0 and T0, the exergy change E2  E1 on the left
                                side of Eq. 7.11 can be evaluated from Eq. 7.10. The underlined terms on the right depend
                                explicitly on the nature of the process, however, and cannot be determined by knowing only
                                the end states and the values of p0 and T0. The first underlined term on the right side of
                                Eq. 7.11 is associated with heat transfer to or from the system during the process. It can be
                                interpreted as the exergy transfer accompanying heat. That is

exergy transfer                exergy transfer   2  a1    T0  b  dQ             (7.12)
accompanying heat                               1         Tb
                             Baccompanying heatR

                    The second underlined term on the right side of Eq. 7.11 is associated with work. It can be
                    interpreted as the exergy transfer accompanying work. That is

exergy transfer         exergy transfer    3W         p01V2      V12 4          (7.13)
accompanying work   Baccompanying workR

                    The exergy transfer expressions are discussed further in Sec. 7.3.2. The third underlined term
                    on the right side of Eq. 7.11 accounts for the destruction of exergy due to irreversibilities
                    within the system. It is symbolized by Ed.

exergy destruction              Ed  T0s                                         (7.14)

                    To summarize, Eq. 7.11 states that the change in exergy of a closed system can be accounted
                    for in terms of exergy transfers and the destruction of exergy due to irreversibilities within
                    the system.

                       When applying the exergy balance, it is essential to observe the requirements imposed by
                    the second law on the exergy destruction: In accordance with the second law, the exergy de-
                    struction is positive when irreversibilities are present within the system during the process
                    and vanishes in the limiting case where there are no irreversibilities. That is

                          7  0  irreversibilities present with the system       (7.15)
                    Ed: e    0  no irreversibilities present within the system

                    The value of the exergy destruction cannot be negative. It is not a property. By contrast, ex-
                    ergy is a property, and like other properties, the change in exergy of a system can be posi-
                    tive, negative, or zero

                                             70                                 (7.16)
                                E2  E1: ·  0

                                             60

                       To close our introduction to the exergy balance concept, we note that most thermal sys-
                    tems are supplied with exergy inputs derived directly or indirectly from the consumption of
                    fossil fuels. Accordingly, avoidable destructions and losses of exergy represent the waste
                    of these resources. By devising ways to reduce such inefficiencies, better use can be made of
                    fuels. The exergy balance can be used to determine the locations, types, and magnitudes
                    of energy resource waste, and thus can play an important part in developing strategies for
                    more effective fuel use.
                                                                             7.3 Closed System Exergy Balance 285

OTHER FORMS OF THE EXERGY BALANCE

As in the case of the mass, energy, and entropy balances, the exergy balance can be expressed
in various forms that may be more suitable for particular analyses. A form of the exergy bal-
ance that is sometimes convenient is the closed system exergy rate balance.

dE    a                         a1    T0 b   #       #      dV   b    #                             closed system
dt                                    Tj    Qj    aW      p0 dt       Ed
        j                                                                                (7.17)  exergy rate balance

                                                                                       #
where dEdt is the time rate of change of exergy. The term (1  T# 0Tj)Qj represents the time

rate of exergy transfer accompanying heat transfer at the rate Qj occu#rring at the location

on the boundary where the instantaneous temperature is Tj. The term W represents the time

rat# e of energy transfer by work. The accompanying rate of exergy transfer is give# n by

(W  p0 dVdt), where dVdt is the time rate of change of system volume. The term Ed ac-

counts for the time rate of exergy destruction due   to   irreversibilities  within the  Es# ydstemT0as#n.d
is related to the rate of entropy production within  the  system by the      expression

For an isolated system, no heat or work interactions with the surroundings occur, and thus

there are no transfers of exergy between the system and its surroundings. Accordingly, the

exergy balance reduces to give

                                    ˘E 4 isol  Ed 4 isol                                 (7.18)

Since the exergy destruction must be positive in any actual process, the only processes of an iso-
lated system that occur are those for which the exergy of the isolated system decreases. For ex-
ergy, this conclusion is the counterpart of the increase of entropy principle (Sec. 6.5.5) and, like
the increase of entropy principle, can be regarded as an alternative statement of the second law.

 7.3.2 Conceptualizing Exergy Transfer

Before taking up examples illustrating the use of the closed system exergy balance, we con-
sider why the exergy transfer expressions take the forms they do. This is accomplished through
simple thought experiments.  for example. . . consider a large metal part initially at the
dead state. If the part were hoisted from a factory floor into a heat-treating furnace, the exergy
of the metal part would increase because its elevation would be increased. As the metal part
was heated in the furnace, the exergy of the part would increase further as its temperature in-
creased because of heat transfer from the hot furnace gases. In a subsequent quenching process,
the metal part would experience a decrease in exergy as its temperature decreased due to heat
transfer to the quenching medium. In each of these processes, the metal part would not actu-
ally interact with the environment used to assign exergy values. However, like the exergy val-
ues at the states visited by the metal part, the exergy transfers taking place between the part
and its surroundings would be evaluated relative to the environment used to define exergy. 

   The following subsections provide means for conceptualizing the exergy transfers that ac-
company heat transfer and work, respectively.

EXERGY TRANSFER ACCOMPANYING HEAT

Consider a system undergoing a process in which a heat transfer Q takes place across a por-
tion of the system boundary where the temperature Tb is constant at Tb  T0. In accordance
with Eq. 7.12, the accompanying exergy transfer is given by

       exergy transfer                               a1     T0 b  Q                      (7.19)
    Baccompanying heatR                                     Tb
286 Chapter 7 Exergy Analysis

                                                Gas                Q

                         p                               Volume constant
                                     T0

                                             Dead state

                         p0

                               Final state,  2
                               T2 < T0

                                              1                            Figure 7.4 Illustration used to discuss an
                               Initial state,                             exergy transfer accompanying heat transfer when
                               T1 < T2 < T0                               T  T0.

                                                                V

Q Tb     WR =               The right side of Eq. 7.19 is recognized from the discussion of Eq. 5.8 as the work, WR,
R                        that could be developed by a reversible power cycle R receiving Q at temperature Tb and dis-
         ( ) 1 ­ T__0 Q  charging energy by heat transfer to the environment at T0. Accordingly, without regard for
     T0        Tb        the nature of the surroundings with which the system is actually interacting, we may inter-
                         pret the magnitude of an exergy transfer accompanying heat transfer as the work that could
                         be developed by supplying the heat transfer to a reversible power cycle operating between
                         Tb and T0. This interpretation also applies for heat transfer below T0, but then we think of
                         the magnitude of an exergy transfer accompanying heat as the work that could be developed
                         by a reversible power cycle receiving a heat transfer from the environment at T0 and dis-
                         charging Q at temperature Tb  T0.

                            Thus far, we have considered only the magnitude of an exergy transfer accompanying heat.
                         It is necessary to account also for the direction. The form of Eq. 7.19 shows that when Tb is
                         greater than T0, the heat transfer and accompanying exergy transfer would be in the same
                         direction: Both quantities would be positive, or negative.

                            However, when Tb is less than T0, the sign of the exergy transfer would be opposite to the
                         sign of the heat transfer, so the heat transfer and accompanying exergy transfer would be
                         oppositely directed.  for example. . . refer to Fig. 7.4, which shows a system consisting
                         of a gas heated at constant volume. As indicated by the p­V diagram, the initial and final
                         temperatures of the gas are each less than T0. Since the state of the system is brought closer
                         to the dead state in this process, the exergy of the system must decrease as it is heated.
                         Conversely, were the gas cooled from state 2 to state 1, the exergy of the system would
                         increase because the state of the system would be moved farther from the dead state.  In
                         summary, when the temperature at the location where heat transfer occurs is less than the
                         temperature of the environment, the heat transfer and accompanying exergy transfer are
                         oppositely directed. This becomes significant when studying the performance of refrigera-
                         tors and heat pumps, where heat transfers can occur at temperatures below that of the
                         environment.

                         EXERGY TRANSFER ACCOMPANYING WORK

                         We conclude the present discussion by taking up a simple example that motivates the form
                         taken by the expression accounting for an exergy transfer accompanying work, Eq. 7.13.
                          for example. . . consider a closed system that does work W while undergoing a
                         process in which the system volume increases: V2  V1. Although the system would not
                         necessarily interact with the environment, the magnitude of the exergy transfer is evaluated
                                    7.3 Closed System Exergy Balance 287

Initial location  Final location
of boundary,      of boundary,
volume = V1       volume = V2

Expanding                           Wc = W ­ p0(V2 ­ V1)
system
does                                                            Figure 7.5 Illustration used to
work W                                                         discuss the expression for an exergy
                                                               transfer accompanying work.
Environment  Environment displaced
at T0, p0    as system expands.
             Work done by system
             on environment
             = p0(V2 ­ V1)

Boundary of the combined
system of system plus environment

as the maximum work that could be obtained were the system and environment interact-
ing. As illustrated by Fig. 7.5, all the work W of the system in the process would not be
available for delivery from a combined system of system plus environment because a por-
tion would be spent in pushing aside the environment, whose pressure is p0. Since the sys-
tem would do work on the surroundings equal to p0(V2  V1), the maximum amount of
work that could be derived from the combined system would thus be

                                         Wc  W  p01V2  V12

which is in accordance with the form of Eq. 7.13. 

   As for heat transfer, work and the accompanying exergy transfer can be in the same di-
rection or oppositely directed. If there were no change in the system volume during the
process, the transfer of exergy accompanying work would equal the work W of the system.

 7.3.3 Illustrations

Further consideration of the exergy balance and the exergy transfer and destruction concepts
is provided by the two examples that follow. In the first example, we reconsider Examples 6.1
and 6.2 to illustrate that exergy is a property, whereas exergy destruction and exergy trans-
fer accompanying heat and work are not properties.

E X A M P L E 7 . 3 Exploring Exergy Change, Transfer, and Destruction

Water initially a saturated liquid at 100C is contained in a piston­cylinder assembly. The water undergoes a process to the
corresponding saturated vapor state, during which the piston moves freely in the cylinder. For each of the two processes de-
scribed below, determine on a unit of mass basis the change in exergy, the exergy transfer accompanying work, the exergy
transfer accompanying heat, and the exergy destruction, each in kJ/kg. Let T0  20C, p0  1.014 bar.

(a) The change in state is brought about by heating the water as it undergoes an internally reversible process at constant tem-
perature and pressure.
(b) The change in state is brought about adiabatically by the stirring action of a paddle wheel.
288 Chapter 7 Exergy Analysis

SOLUTION

Known: Saturated liquid at 100C undergoes a process to the corresponding saturated vapor state.

Find: Determine the change in exergy, the exergy transfers accompanying work and heat, and the exergy destruction for
each of two specified processes.

Schematic and Given Data: See Figs. E6.1 and E6.2.

Assumptions:

1. For part (a), see the assumptions listed for Example 6.1. For part (b), see the assumptions listed for Example 6.2.
2. T0  20C, p0  1.014 bar.

Analysis:

(a) The change in specific exergy is obtained using Eq. 7.9

                                      ˘e  ug  uf  p01vg  vf2  T01sg  sf2

Using data from Table A-2

              ˘e  2087.56 kJ          a1.014        105  N   b  a1.672  m3 b        `     1 kJ  m  `    1293.15  K2 a6.048        kJ    b
                                kg                       m2             kg             103 N #                                  kg # K

               484 kJkg

Using the expression for work obtained in the solution to Example 6.1, Wm  pvfg, the transfer of exergy accompanying
work is

                                      BacceoxmerpgayntyrianngsfwerorkR            W        p0 1vg     vf2
                                                                                  m

                                                                         1 p  p02vfg  0

Although the work has a nonzero value, there is no accompanying exergy transfer in this case because p  p0.
    Using the heat transfer value calculated in Example 6.1, the transfer of exergy of accompanying heat transfer in the constant-

temperature process is

                                                BacecxoemrgpyantyrainngsfhereatR       a1    T0 b  Q
                                                                                             T     m

                                                                                   a1  293.15 K b a2257 kJ b
                                                                                             373.15 K            kg

                                                                                   484 kJ/kg

     The positive value indicates that exergy transfer occurs in the same direction as the heat transfer.
         Since the process is accomplished without irreversibilities, the exergy destruction is necessarily zero in value. This can be

     verified by inserting the three exergy quantities evaluated above into an exergy balance and evaluating Edm.

 (b) Since the end states are the same as in part (a), the change in exergy is the same. Moreover, because there is no heat trans-

     fer, there is no exergy transfer accompanying heat. The exergy transfer accompanying work is

                                      BacceoxmerpgayntyrianngsfwerorkR            W        p0 1vg     vf2
                                                                                  m

With the net work value determined in Example 6.2 and evaluating the change in specific volume as in part (a)

              BacceoxmerpgayntyrianngsfwerorkR    2087.56       kJ    a1.014               105  N     a1.672  m3    `     1 kJ  m  `
                                                                kg                              m2 b             b     103 N #

                                                                                                              kg

                                                 2257 kJ/kg

The minus sign indicates that the net transfer of exergy accompanying work is into the system.
                                                                                        7.3 Closed System Exergy Balance 289

      Finally, the exergy destruction is determined from an exergy balance. Solving Eq. 7.11 for the exergy destruction per unit
  mass

                Ed    ˘e    cW                 p0 1vg    vf2 d    484     122572            1773 kJ/kg
                m            m

      The numerical values obtained can be interpreted as follows: 2257 kJ/kg of exergy is transferred into the system accom-
  panying work; of this, 1773 kJ/kg is destroyed by irreversibilities, leaving a net increase of only 484 kJ/kg.

   Exergy is a property and thus the exergy change during a process is determined solely by the end states. Exergy de-

      struction and exergy transfer accompanying heat and work are not properties. Their values depend on the nature of the

      process.

   Alternatively, the exergy destruction value of part (b) could be determined using Edm  T0(m), where m is obtained

      from the solution to Example 6.2. This is left as an exercise.

   In the next example, we reconsider the gearbox of Examples 2.4 and 6.4 from an exergy
perspective to introduce exergy accounting.

  E X A M P L E 7 . 4 Exergy Accounting for a Gearbox

  For the gearbox of Examples 2.4 and 6.4(a), develop a full exergy accounting of the power input. Let T0  293 K.

  SOLUTION

  Known: A gearbox operates at steady state with known values for the power input, power output, and heat transfer rate. The
  temperature on the outer surface of the gearbox is also known.

  Find: Develop a full exergy accounting of the input power.

  Schematic and Given Data: See Fig. E6.4a.

  Assumptions:

  1. See the solution to Example 6.4(a).

  2. T0  293 K.
                                                                                                                                          #

  Analysis: Since the gearbox volume is constant, the rate of exergy transfer accompanying power, namely 1W  p0 dVdt2,

  reduces to the power itself. Accordingly, exergy is transferred into the gearbox via the high-speed shaft at a rate equal to the
  power input, 60 kW, and exergy is transferred out via the low-speed shaft at a rate equal to the power output, 58.8 kW.
  Additionally, exergy is transferred out accompanying heat transfer and destroyed by irreversibilities within the gearbox.

      Let us evaluate the rate of exergy transfer accompanying heat transfer. Since the temperature Tb at the outer surface of the
  gearbox is uniform with position

                          BtranstfiemreacractoemopfaenxyeirnggyheatR    a1       T0  b   #
                                                                                        Q
                                                                                 Tb

          #
  With Q  1.2 kW and Tb  300 K from Example 6.4a, and T0  293 K

                      BtranstfiemreacractoemopfaenxyeirnggyheatR    a1    293 b  11.2       kW2
                                                                          300

                                                                   0.03 kW

  where the minus sign denotes exergy transfer from the system.
290 Chapter 7 Exergy Analysis

      Next,  the rate of exergy destruction is calculated from        #         #  where   #  is  the  rate  of  entropy  production.  From  the  so-
  lution to                     #                                     Ed     T0s,         s
                               s
             Example  6.4(a),        4     103  kW/K.  Then

                                                      #         #
                                                      Ed     T0s

                                                           1293 K2 14  103 kW/K2

                                                           1.17 kW

  The analysis is summarized by the following exergy balance sheet in terms of exergy magnitudes on a rate basis:

                                           Rate of exergy in:

                                                high-speed shaft                   60.00 kW (100%)

                                           Disposition of the exergy:

                                           · Rate of exergy out

                                                low-speed shaft                    58.80 kW (98%)

                                                heat transfer                      0.03 kW (0.05%)

                                           · Rate of exergy destruction            1.17 kW (1.95%)

                                                                                   60.00 kW (100%)

   Alternatively, the rate of exergy destruction can be determined from the steady-state form of the exergy rate balance,

      Eq. 7.17. This is left as an exercise.

   The difference between the input and output power is accounted for primarily by the rate of exergy destruction and only

      secondarily by the exergy transfer accompanying heat transfer, which is small by comparison. The exergy balance sheet
      provides a sharper picture of performance than the energy balance sheet of Example 2.4, which ignores the effect of irre-
      versibilities within the system and overstates the significance of the heat transfer.

                               7.4 Flow Exergy

                               The objective of the present section is to develop the flow exergy concept. This concept is
                               important for the control volume form of the exergy rate balance introduced in Sec. 7.5.

                                   When mass flows across the boundary of a control volume, there is an exergy transfer ac-
                               companying mass flow. Additionally, there is an exergy transfer accompanying flow work.
                               The specific flow exergy accounts for both of these, and is given by

specific flow exergy                                               ef     h    h0    T01s         s02        V2     gz                            (7.20)
                                                                                                             2

                               In Eq. 7.20, h and s represent the specific enthalpy and entropy, respectively, at the inlet or
                               exit under consideration; h0 and s0 represent the respective values of these properties when
                               evaluated at the dead state.

                               EXERGY TRANSFER ACCOMPANYING FLOW WORK

                               As a preliminary to deriving Eq. 7.20, it is necessary to account for the exergy transfer ac-

                               companying flow work.

                                   When one-dimensional flow is assumed, the work at the inlet or exit of a control volume,
                                                                                               #                     #
                               the   flow  work,  is  given    on  a   time  rate  basis  by  m(  pv),       where  m   is  the  mass  flow  rate,  p  is
                                                                                                                                          7.4 Flow Exergy 291

the pressure, and v is the specific volume at the inlet or exit (Sec. 4.2.1). The following ex-
pression accounts for the exergy transfer accompanying flow work

                    c     time rate of exergy transfer            d       #    1pv      p0v2                                          exergy transfer:
                           accompanying flow work                        m
                                                                                                                           (7.21) 

                                                                                                                                      flow work

For the development of Eq. 7.21, see box.

ACCOUNTING FOR EXERGY TRANSFER                                                                                                          Control volume
ACCOMPANYING FLOW WORK                                                                                                                  boundary

Let us develop Eq. 7.21 for the case pictured in Fig. 7.6. The figure shows a closed                                                   (a) Time t.
system that occupies different regions at time t and a later time t  t. The fixed
quantity of matter under consideration is shown in color. During the time interval                                                                            Region e
t, some of the mass initially within the region labeled control volume exits to fill                                                                          me, ve
the small region e adjacent to the control volume, as shown in Fig. 7.6b. We assume                                                 (b) Time t + t.
that the increase in the volume of the closed system in the time interval t is equal                                              Figure 7.6 Illustra-
to the volume of region e and, for further simplicity, that the only work is associ-                                             tion used to introduce the
ated with this volume change. With Eq. 7.13, the exergy transfer accompanying                                                    flow exergy concept.
work is

                                    exergy transfer                      W       p0     ˘V                              (7.22a)
                                Baccompanying workR

where V is the volume change of the system. The volume change of the system equals

the volume of region e. Thus, we may write V  meve, where me is the mass within
region e and ve is the specific volume, which is regarded as uniform throughout
region e. With this expression for V, Eq. 7.22a becomes

                                    exergy transfer                  W          me1     p0ve2                           (7.22b)
                                Baccompanying workR

   Equation 7.22b can be placed on a time rate basis by dividing each term by the time
interval t and taking the limit as t approaches zero. That is

                     time rate of exergy              R     lim a W b                   lim     c  me  1  p0ve2  d      (7.23)
               Btransfer accompanying work                  ˘tS0 ˘t                                ˘t
                                                                                        ˘t S 0

In the limit as t approaches zero, the boundaries of the closed system and control vol-
ume coincide. Accordingly, in this limit the rate of energy transfer by work from the
closed system is also the rate of energy transfer by work from the control volume. For
the present case, this is just the flow work. Thus, the first term on the right side of
Eq. 7.23 becomes

                                          lim   aWb               m# e1  peve2                                          (7.24)
                                                 ˘t
                                          ˘tS0

where   #  is  the  mass  flow  rate  at  the  exit   of  the     control      volume.          In  the   limit     as  t  ap-
       me

proaches zero, the second term on the right side of Eq. 7.23 becomes

                                      lim   c  me  1  p0ve  2  d      #  e  1  p0ve  2                                  (7.25)
                                               ˘t                    m
                                      ˘tS0
292 Chapter 7 Exergy Analysis

In this limit, the assumption of uniform specific volume throughout region e corre-
sponds to the assumption of uniform specific volume across the exit (one-dimensional
flow).

   Substituting Eqs. 7.24 and 7.25 into Eq. 7.23 gives

                               time rate of exergy transfer                  #   1  peve2       #   1  p0ve2
                               B accompanying flow work R                   me                 me

                                                                             #   1  peve    p0ve2             (7.26)
                                                                            me

   Extending the reasoning given here, it can be shown that an expression having the
same form as Eq. 7.26 accounts for the transfer of exergy accompanying flow work at
inlets to control volumes as well. The general result applying at both inlets and exits
is given by Eq. 7.21.

DEVELOPING THE FLOW EXERGY CONCEPT

With the introduction of the expression for the exergy transfer accompanying flow work, at-
tention now turns to the flow exergy. When mass flows across the boundary of a control vol-
ume, there is an accompanying energy transfer given by

                               time rate of energy transfer                  #
                               B accompanying mass flow R                   me

                                                                             #   au        V2          gzb    (7.27)
                                                                            m
                                                                                           2

where e is the specific energy evaluated at the inlet or exit under consideration. Likewise,
when mass enters or exits a control volume, there is an accompanying exergy transfer
given by

                               time rate of exergy transfer    m# e
                               B accompanying mass flow R

                                                              m# 3 1e  u02  p01v  v02  T01s  s02 4            (7.28)

where e is the specific exergy at the inlet or exit under consideration. In writing Eqs. 7.27
and 7.28, one-dimensional flow is assumed. In addition to an exergy transfer accompanying
mass flow, an exergy transfer accompanying flow work takes place at locations where mass
enters or exits a control volume. Transfers of exergy accompanying flow work are accounted
for by Eq. 7.21.

   Since transfers of exergy accompanying mass flow and flow work occur at locations where
mass enters or exits a control volume, a single expression giving the sum of these effects is
convenient. Thus, with Eqs. 7.21 and 7.28,

         time rate of exergy transfer  workR                         m# 3e    1  pv        p0v2  4
Baccompanying mass flow and flow

                                                                m# 3 1e  u02  p01v  v02  T01s  s02 (7.29)

                                                                  1 pv  p0v2 4

   The underlined terms in Eq. 7.29 represent, per unit of mass, the exergy transfer accom-
panying mass flow and flow work, respectively. The sum identified by underlining is the spe-
cific flow exergy ef. That is

                               ef  1e  u02  p01v  v02  T01s  s02  1 pv  p0v2                                  (7.30a)
                                                                               7.5 Exergy Rate Balance for Control Volumes 293

Thermodynamics in the News...

Wind Power Looming Large                                            turbine sites sufficient winds
                                                                    may not always be available
What stands as tall as a 30-story building and produces elec-       when power is most needed.
tricity at a rate that would meet the needs of about 900 typical    Cost is another issue. At 4 to 6
U.S. homes? One of the world's largest commercial wind tur-         cents per kW # h, wind-gener-
bines. Designed specifically for use in North America, the three-   ated electricity costs up to
bladed rotor of this wind turbine has a diameter nearly the length  twice as much as from coal-
of a football field and operates in winds up to 55 miles per hour.  fired power plants.

    This wind turbine features microprocessor control of all            Still, wind power is second
functions and the option of remote monitoring. Other special        only to hydroelectric power
features include a regulating system ensuring that each blade       among the renewable energy
is always pitched at the correct angle for current wind condi-      resources used by utilities to-
tions. Both the rotor and generator can vary their rotational       day. Wind energy plants take
speed during wind gusts, reducing fluctuations in the power         less time to build than conventional plants and are modular,
provided to the electricity grid and the forces acting on the       allowing additional units to be added as warranted. They also
vital parts of the turbine.                                         produce no carbon dioxide and have minimal environmental
                                                                    impact.
    Wind turbines are not without detractors. They are consid-
ered unsightly by some and noisy by others; and at some wind

The specific flow exergy can be placed in a more convenient form for calculation by intro-
ducing e  u  V22  gz in Eq. 7.30a and simplifying to obtain

              V2
ef  au  2  gz  u0b  1 pv  p0v02  T01s  s02

  1u    pv2    1u0    p0v02    T01s                                 s02    V2    gz  (7.30b)
                                                                           2

Finally, with h  u  pv and h0  u0  p0v0, Eq. 7.30b gives Eq. 7.20, which is the prin-
cipal result of this section. Equation 7.20 is used in the next section where the exergy rate
balance for control volumes is formulated.

   A comparison of the current development with that of Sec. 4.2 shows that the flow exergy
evolves here in a similar way as does enthalpy in the development of the control volume energy
rate balance, and they have similar interpretations: Each quantity is a sum consisting of a term
associated with the flowing mass (specific internal energy for enthalpy, specific exergy for flow
exergy) and a contribution associated with flow work at the inlet or exit under consideration.

7.5 Exergy Rate Balance for Control Volumes

In this section, the exergy balance is extended to a form applicable to control volumes. The
control volume form is generally the most useful for engineering analysis.

GENERAL FORM

The exergy rate balance for a control volume can be derived using an approach like that
employed in the box of Sec. 4.1, where the control volume form of the mass rate balance is
obtained by transforming the closed system form. However, as in the developments of the
energy and entropy rate balances for control volumes, the present derivation is conducted
less formally by modifying the closed system rate form, Eq. 7.17, to account for the exergy
transfers accompanying mass flow and flow work at the inlets and exits.
294 Chapter 7 Exergy Analysis

                                    The result is the control volume exergy rate balance

                              dEcv    a   a1    T0  b   #       #         p0ddVtcv b  a         m# iefi    a   m# eefe    #      (7.31)
                               dt               Tj     Qj    aWcv                                                         Ed
                                       j                                                    i               e
control volume       
exergy rate balance    rate of                                    rate of                                               rate of

                       exergy                                     exergy                                                exergy

                       change                                     transfer                                          destruction

                       As for control volume rate balances considered previously, i denotes inlets and e denotes

                       exits.
                          In Eq. 7.31 the term# dEcvdt represents the time rate of change of the exergy of the con-

                       trol volume. The term Qj represents the time rate of heat transfer at the location on the bound-
                       ary where the in#stantaneous te# mperature is Tj. The accompanying exergy transfer rate is given

                       by (1  T0 Tj)Qj. The term Wcv represents the time rate of energy tran# sfer rate by work other
                       edthrVgacynvftdlroat wnisswftehoreraktci.mcToehmerpaaatcencyooifmncgphamannaygsiensgoflfeoxvweorlagunymdterf.alonTwshfeewrteorarrmkteamits# iiegnfiliveaetcnic.boSyuinm(Wtsilcafvorlryt,hpme0# iedtifVme caevcrdcaott)ue,nwotfsheefoxrer-

                       the time rate of exergy transfer accompanying mass flow and flow work at exit e. The flow

                       exergies efi and efe appearing in these expressions are evaluated using Eq. 7.20. In writing
                       Eq. 7.31, #one-dimensional flow is assumed at locations where mass enters and exits. Finally,
                       the term Ed accounts for the time rate of exergy destruction due to irreversibilities within the
                       control volume.

                       STEADY-STATE FORMS

                       Since a great many engineering analyses involve control volumes at steady state, steady-
                       state forms of the exergy rate balance are particularly important. At steady state, dEcvdt 
                       dVcvdt  0, so Eq. 7.31 reduces to the steady-state exergy rate balance

steady-state exergy                       0    a   a1      T0  b   #       #      a    m# iefi      a    m# eefe    #            (7.32a)
rate balance:                                              Tj     Qj      Wcv                                       Ed
control volumes                                 j                                   i                 e

                       This equation indicates that the rate at which exergy is transferred into the control volume
                       must exceed the rate at which exergy is transferred out, the difference being the rate at which
                       exergy is destroyed within the control volume due to irreversibilities.

                          Equation 7.32a can be expressed more compactly as

                                                           ##                     #               ##

                                                0  a Eqj  Wcv  a Efi  a Efe  Ed                                                  (7.32b)

                                                       j                       i               e

                       where

                                                                  #       a1      T0   b   #                                      (7.33)
                                                                  Eq j            Tj      Qj
                                                                                                                                 (7.34a)
                                                                  #        #                                                     (7.34b)
                                                                  Efi     miefi
                                                                  #
                                                                  Efe      #
                                                                          meefe

                       ar# e exergy transfer rates. At steady state, the rate of exergy transfer accompanying the power
                       Wcv is the power itself.
                                                                                                  7.5 Exergy Rate Balance for Control Volumes 295

   If there is a single inlet and a single exit, denoted by 1 and 2, respectively, Eq. 7.32a re-
duces to

                          0     a    a1    T0 b   #      #            #  1  ef1     ef22    #                   (7.35)
                                           Tj    Qj     Wcv          m                      Ed
                                  j

where   #  is  the  mass  flow  rate.  The  term  (ef1         ef2)  is     evaluated     using  Eq.  7.20  as          METHODOLOGY
       m                                                                                                                UPDATE

               ef1        ef2    1h1     h22     T01s1         s22       V21        V22    g1z1    z22          (7.36)  When the rate of exergy
                                                                                 2                                                     #

                                                                                                                        destruction Ed is the

                                                                                                                        objective, it can be

                                                                                                                        determined either from an

                                                                                                                        exergy rate balance or
                                                                                                                        fsr# ocvmisE#tdheraTt0es# covf,
                                                                                                                                                         where
                                                                                                                                                         entropy

ILLUSTRATIONS                                                                                                           production evaluated from

The following examples illustrate the use of the mass, energy, and exergy rate balances for                             an entropy rate balance.
the analysis of control volumes at steady state. Property data also play an important role in
arriving at solutions. The first example involves the expansion of a gas through a valve                                The second of these pro-
(a throttling process, Sec. 4.3). From an energy perspective, the expansion of the gas occurs
without loss. Yet, as shown in Example 7.5, such a valve is a site of thermodynamic ineffi-                             cedures normally requires
ciency quantified by exergy destruction.
                                                                                                                        fewer property evalua-

                                                                                                                        tions and less

                                                                                                                        computation.

E X A M P L E 7 . 5 Exergy Destruction in a Throttling Valve

Superheated water vapor enters a valve at 3.0 MPa, 320C and exits at a pressure of 0.5 MPa. The expansion is a throt-
tling process. Determine the specific flow exergy at the inlet and exit and the exergy destruction per unit of mass flowing,
each in kJ/kg. Let T0  25C, p0  1 atm.

SOLUTION
Known: Water vapor expands in a throttling process through a valve from a specified inlet state to a specified exit pressure.
Find: Determine the specific flow exergy at the inlet and exit of the valve and the exergy destruction per unit of mass flowing.
Schematic and Given Data:

1                                                         2          Assumptions:
                                         0.5 MPa
       Steam                                                         1. The control volume shown in the accompanying figure is at steady
       3.0 MPa                                                       state.
       320°C
                                                                                                           ##
                                                                     2. For the throttling process, Qcv  Wcv  0, and kinetic and poten-
                                                                     tial energy effects can be ignored.

                                                                     3. T0  25C, p0  1 atm.

                                                                      Figure E7.5
296 Chapter 7 Exergy Analysis

  Analysis: The state at the inlet is specified. The state at the exit can be fixed by reducing the steady-state mass and energy
  rate balances to obtain

                                                                          h2  h1

  Thus, the exit state is fixed by p2 and h2. From Table A-4, h1  3043.4 kJ/s, s1  6.6245 kJ/kg # k. Interpolating at a pressure
  of 0.5 MPa with h2  h1, the specific entropy at the exit is s2  7.4223 kJ/kg # k. Evaluating h0 and s0 at the saturated liquid
  state corresponding to T0, Table A-2 gives h0  104.89 kJ/kg, s0  0.3674 kJ/kg # k.

      Dropping V22 and gz, we obtain the specific flow exergy from Eq. 7.20 as

                                                              ef  h  h0  T01s  s02
  Substituting values into the expression for ef, the flow exergy at the inlet is

                                    ef1  13043.4  104.892  29816.6245  0.36742  1073.89 kJ/kg
  At the exit

                                 ef2  13043.4  104.892  29817.4223  0.36742  836.15 kJ/kg
  With assumptions listed, the steady-state form of the exergy rate balance, Eq. 7.35, reduces to

                                                                         0

                                             0    a         a1    T0 b       #     #0      #  1ef1    ef22       #
                                                                  Tj        Qj    Wcv     m                      Ed
                                                         j

  Dividing  by  the    mass  flow  rate   #  and  solving,  the   exergy        destruction  per  unit  of  mass  flowing  is
                                         m

                                                                      #

                                                                      Ed        1ef1    ef22
                                                                       #
                                                                      m

     Inserting values                             #

                                                  Ed            1073.89         836.15       237.7  kJ/kg
                                                   #
                                                  m

   Since h1  h2, this expression for the exergy destruction reduces to

                                                                      #

                                                                      Ed        T01s2    s12
                                                                       #
                                                                      m

  Thus, the exergy destruction can be determined knowing only T0 an# d                        the specific       entropies s1 and  s2. The   foregoing equa-
                                                                                                       #         then evaluating   the rate  of entropy pro-
  tion  can     be  obtained  alternatively  beginning          with  the   relationship  Ed        T0scv   and
                #
  duction scv from an entropy balance.

   Energy is conserved in the throttling process, but exergy is destroyed. The source of the exergy destruction is the uncon-

  trolled expansion that occurs.

                                     Although heat exchangers appear from an energy perspective to operate without loss when
                                  stray heat transfer is ignored, they are a site of thermodynamic inefficiency quantified by ex-
                                  ergy destruction. This is illustrated in the next example.

     E X A M P L E 7 . 6 Exergy Destruction in a Heat Exchanger

     Compressed air enters a counterflow heat exchanger operating at steady state at 610 K, 10 bar and exits at 860 K, 9.7 bar. Hot
     combustion gas enters as a separate stream at 1020 K, 1.1 bar and exits at 1 bar. Each stream has a mass flow rate of 90 kg/s.

 Heat transfer between the outer surface of the heat exchanger and the surroundings can be ignored. Kinetic and potential energy

     effects are negligible. Assuming the combustion gas stream has the properties of air, and using the ideal gas model for both
     streams, determine for the heat exchanger
                                                                                              7.5 Exergy Rate Balance for Control Volumes 297

(a) the exit temperature of the combustion gas, in K.
(b) the net change in the flow exergy rate from inlet to exit of each stream, in MW.
(c) the rate exergy is destroyed, in MW.
Let T0  300 K, p0  1 bar.

SOLUTION
Known: Steady-state operating data are provided for a counterflow heat exchanger.
Find: For the heat exchanger, determine the exit temperature of the combustion gas, the change in the flow exergy rate from
inlet to exit of each stream, and the rate exergy is destroyed.
Schematic and Given Data:

                     Tave              T3

           T4                          T2

           T1

                                                                                  Assumptions:

                                               T3 = 1020 K                        1. The control volume shown in the accompanying figure
                                           3 p3 = 1.1 bar
p4 = 1 bar 4                                                                      is at steady state.
                                               Fuel
Combustion                                                                                                                 #           #
gases
                                                                                  2. For the control volume, Qcv  0, Wcv  0, and changes

                                                                                  in kinetic and potential energy from inlet to exit are

                                                                                  negligible.

                                    2                                             3. Each stream has the properties of air modeled as an
                                              Combustor                           ideal gas.

               1 T1 = 610 K T2 = 860 K                                            4. T0  300 K, p0  1 bar.
                   p1 = 10 bar p2 = 9.7 bar

                 Compressor                         Turbine
           Air

                                                                                   Figure E7.6

Analysis:

(a) The temperature T4 of the exiting combustion gases can be found by reducing the mass and energy rate balances for the
control volume at steady state to obtain

0              #      #       #  c  1  h1    h22    a V12     V22 b      g1z1     z22 d       #  c  1  h3    h42    a V32     V24 b    g1z3    z42 d
              Qcv    Wcv     m                             2                                 m                             2

         #
where m is the common mass flow rate of the two streams. The underlined terms drop out by listed assumptions, leaving

                                                    0          #  1  h1    h22     #  1  h3    h42
                                                              m                   m

                #
Dividing by m and solving for h4

                                                              h4  h3  h1  h2

From Table A-22, h1  617.53 kJ/kg, h2  888.27 kJ/kg, h3  1068.89 kJ/kg. Inserting values

                                             h4  1068.89  617.53  888.27  798.15 kJ/kg

 Interpolating in Table A-22 gives T4  778 K (505C).
298 Chapter 7 Exergy Analysis

(b) The net change in the flow exergy rate from inlet to exit for the compressed air stream can be evaluated using Eq. 7.36,
neglecting the effects of motion and gravity. With Eq. 6.21a and data from Table A-22

   #  1ef2             ef12       #  1h2          h12         T01s2           s12
  m                              m

                                  #  c  1h2       h12          T0  as°2         s°1      R  ln    p2 b d
                                 m                                                                p1

                                    kg       c 1888.27             617.532 kJ               300 K a2.79783                  2.42644      8.314     ln  9.7  b    kJ    d
                                 90                                         kg                                                           28.97         10      kg # K

                                     s

                                 14,103      kJ      `  1 MW        `      14.1 MW
                                             s          103 kJ/s

Thus, as the air passes from 1 to 2, its flow exergy increases.
    Similarly, the change in the flow exergy rate from inlet to exit for the combustion gas is

                   #   1ef4      ef32         #   c     1h4    h32            T0 as°4       s°3        R  ln p4 b d
                  m                          m                                                              p3

                                         90 c 1798.15  1068.892                             300a2.68769  2.99034                         8.314         1  bd
                                                                                                                                                ln
                                                                                                                                         28.97 1.1

                                         16,934 kJ                     `  1 MW        `   16.93 MW
                                                       s                  103 kJ/s

     Thus, as the combustion gas passes from 3 to 4, its flow exergy decreases.

 (c) The rate of exergy destruction within the control volume can be determined from an exergy rate balance

                                                                   0

                                 0      a         a1          T0 b         #     #0          #   1ef1     ef22        #  1  ef3    ef42    #
                                                              Tj          Qj    Wcv         m                        m                     Ed
                                               j

               #
Solving for Ed and inserting known values

                                                        #       #  1ef1         ef22        #  1  ef3     ef42
                                                        Ed     m                           m

                                                              114.1 MW2  116.93 MW2  2.83 MW

     Comparing results, we see that the exergy increase of the compressed air stream is less than the exergy decrease of the com-

 bustion gas stream, even though each has the same energy change. The difference is accounted for by exergy destruction.

     Energy is conserved but exergy is not.

 Heat exchangers of this type are known as regenerators (see Sec. 9.7).

 The variation in temperature of each stream passing through the heat exchanger is sketched in the schematic.
                                                                                                                #         #               #
  Alternatively,  the  rate  of  exergy      destruction               can    be   determined          using    Ed     T0scv,    where scv     is  the  rate   of  entropy  produc-

  tion evaluated from an entropy rate balance. This is left as an exercise.

 Exergy is destroyed by irreversibilities associated with fluid friction and stream-to-stream heat transfer. The pressure drops

    for the streams are indicators of frictional irreversibility. The temperature difference between the streams is an indicator

  of heat transfer irreversibility.

                                The next two examples provide further illustrations of exergy accounting. The first in-
                             volves the steam turbine with stray heat transfer considered previously in Ex. 6.6.
                                                                                     7.5 Exergy Rate Balance for Control Volumes 299

  E X A M P L E 7 . 7 Exergy Accounting of a Steam Turbine

  Steam enters a turbine with a pressure of 30 bar, a temperature of 400C, a velocity of 160 m/s. Steam exits as saturated va-
  por at 100C with a velocity of 100 m /s. At steady state, the turbine develops work at a rate of 540 kJ per kg of steam flow-
  ing through the turbine. Heat transfer between the turbine and its surroundings occurs at an average outer surface tempera-
  ture of 350 K. Develop a full accounting of the net exergy carried in by the steam, per unit mass of steam flowing. Neglect
  the change in potential energy between inlet and exit. Let T0  25C, p0  1 atm.

  SOLUTION

  Known: Steam expands through a turbine for which steady-state data are provided.

  Find: Develop a full exergy accounting of the net exergy carried in by the steam, per unit mass of steam flowing.

  Schematic and Given Data: See Fig. E6.6.

  Assumptions:

  1. The turbine is at steady state.
  2. Heat transfer between the turbine and the surroundings occurs at a known temperature.
  3. The change in potential energy between inlet and exit can be neglected.
  4. T0  25C, p0  1 atm.

  Analysis: The net exergy carried in per unit mass of steam flowing is obtained using Eq. 7.36

                       ef1         ef2          1h1      h22          T01s1          s22      a V21     V22 b
                                                                                                     2

  where the potential energy term is dropped by assumption 3. From Table A-4, h1  3230.9 kJ/kg, s1  6.9212 kJ/kg # K. From
  Table A-2, h2  2676.1 kJ /kg, s2  7.3549 kJ/kg # K. Hence, the net rate exergy is carried in is

                       ef1  ef2  c 13230.9  2676.12  29816.9212  7.35492                                   116022  110022  d

                                                                                                               2103

                        691.84 kJ/kg

  The net exergy carried in can be accounted for in terms of exergy transfers accompanying work and heat from the control

  vtihtoseelulmfm,aeosrsaWna#dncdvexmee#nregryg5yd4er0sattkreuJ/cbktaigol.annTcwehiset:hqiQnu# catvnhtmei#tcyoQn#tcrvo2lm2#v.6oislkueJmv/kaegl.u.AaTttehsdeteiaancdctyhoemstsapotaelnu, yttihionengetxeoxeEergrxgyaymtrtaprnalensfs6efr.e6racuiscsoinmgptahneysitnegadwyo-rsktaitse  the work
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     forms of

                                            #                               #

                                            Eq       a1           T0  b  a  Qcv   b
                                             #                                #
                                            m                     Tb m

                                                 a1  298 b a22.6 kJ b
                                                                  350                     kg

                                                 3.36 kJ
                                                           kg

  where Tb denotes the temperature on the boundary where heat transfer occurs.
      The exergy destruction can be determined by rearranging the steady-state form of the exergy rate balance, Eq. 7.35, to give

                               #                               #               #

                               Ed           a1       T0  b  a  Qcv  b          Wcv        1ef1       ef22
                                #                                #               #
                               m                     Tb m                       m

  Substituting values

                            #

                       Ed                   3.36         540          691.84         148.48     kJ/kg
                        #
                            m
300 Chapter 7 Exergy Analysis

The analysis is summarized by the following exergy balance sheet in terms of exergy magnitudes on a rate basis:

                               Net rate of exergy in:        691.84 kJ/kg (100%)
                               Disposition of the exergy:
                               · Rate of exergy out          540.00 kJ/kg (78.05%)
                                                                3.36 kJ/kg (0.49%)
                                     work
                                     heat transfer           148.48 kJ/kg (21.46%)
                               · Rate of exergy destruction  691.84 kJ/kg (100%)

  Note that the exergy transfer accompanying heat transfer is small relative to the other terms.

  The exergy  bdaelsatnrucec.tiTonhecasnolbuetiodnetetormEixnaemd pallete6rn.6atpivreolvyiduessinsg# cvE#dm#T00s.4# c9v,8w3 hkeJr/ekgs# c# vKi.s  the  rate  of  entropy  production  from
  an entropy

                 The next example illustrates the use of exergy accounting to identify opportunities for
              improving thermodynamic performance.

E X A M P L E 7 . 8 Exergy Accounting of a Waste Heat Recovery System

Suppose the system of Example 4.10 is one option under consideration for utilizing the combustion products discharged from
an industrial process.
(a) Develop a full accounting of the net exergy carried in by the combustion products.
(b) Discuss the design implications of the results.

SOLUTION
Known: Steady-state operating data are provided for a heat-recovery steam generator and a turbine.
Find: Develop a full accounting of the net rate exergy is carried in by the combustion products and discuss the implications
for design.
Schematic and Given Data:

                m· 1 = 69.78 kg/s
                p1 = 1 bar 1
                T1 = 478°K

                                              Turbine         ·            Assumptions:
                                                             Wcv = 877 kW  1. See solution to Example 4.10.
                           4                                               2. T0  298K.
        2                 T4 = 180°C
               Steam p4 = 0.275 MPa                                         Figure E7.8
T2 = 400°K    generator
p2 = 1 bar
                                                    5

           3 p3 = .275 MPa        p5 = 0.07 bar
  Water in Tm·33==328..098°Ckg/s  x5 = 93%
                                                                                                 7.5 Exergy Rate Balance for Control Volumes 301

  Analysis:

  (a) We begin by determining the net rate exergy is carried into the control volume. Modeling the combustion products as an
  ideal gas, the net rate is determined using Eq. 7.36 together with Eq. 6.21a as

                                   #  3  ef1    ef2 4           #  3  h1    h2      T01s1          s22 4
                                  m1                           m1

                                                                #  c  h1     h2      T0 as°1           s°2     R  ln  p1 b d
                                                               m1                                                     p2

  With data from Table A-22, h1  480.35 kJ/kg, h2  400.97 kJ/kg, s°1  2.173 kJ/kg # °K, s°2  1.992 kJ/kg # °K, and p2  p1,
  we have

             m# 1ef1    ef2       69.8   kg/s    c 1480.35               400.972 kJ          298°K12.173                 1.9922    kJ        kJ/s
                                                                                  kg                                             kg # °C d

                              1775.78 kJ/s

      Next, we determine the rate exergy is carried out of the control volume. Exergy is carried out of the control volume
  by work at a rate of 876.8 kJ/s, as shown on the schematic. Additionally, the net rate exergy is carried out by the water
  stream is

                                              m# 3ef5  ef3  m# 3h5  h3  T01s5  s32

  From Table A-2E, h3  hf 139°C2  162.82 kg/s, s3  sf 139°C2  0.5598 kJ/kg # °K. Using saturation data at 0.07 bars from
  Table A-3 with x5  0.93 gives h5  2403.27 kJ/kg and s5  7.739 kJ/kg # °K. Substituting values

             m# 3ef5         ef3         2.08  kg  c   12403.27            162.822       kJ      29817.739               0.55982    kJ       d
                                               s                                         kg                                       kg # °K

                                   209.66 kJ/s

      Next, the rate exergy is destroyed in the heat-recovery steam generator can be obtained from an exergy rate balance ap-
  plied to a control volume enclosing the steam generator. That is

                                                      0

                          0    a      a1        T0 b       #        #0        #  1  ef1      ef22       #   1  ef3       ef42    #
                                                Tj        Qj       Wcv       m1                        m3                        Ed
                                 j

                                                                    #
  Evaluating 1ef3  ef42 with Eq. 7.36 and solving for Ed

                                         #          #  1  ef1      ef22      m# 3h3          h4    T01s3            s42
                                         Ed        m1

  The first term on the right is evaluated above. Then, with h4  2825 kJ/kg, s4  7.2196 kJ/kg # °K at 180°C, .275 MPa from
  Table A-4, and previously determined values for h3 and s3

                 #        1775.78        kJ          kg        c  1162       28252       kJ      2981.559           7.21962        kJ     d
                 Ed                      s      2.08                                     kg                                      kg # °K

                                                      s

                         366.1 kJ/s

      Finally, the rate exergy is destroyed in the turbine can be obtained from an exergy rate balance applied to a control vol-
  ume enclosing the turbine. That is

                                                                      0

                                      0       a    a1          T0 b       ##                 m# 41ef4       ef52      #
                                                               Tj        Qj  Wcv                                      Ed
                                                j

                 #
  Solving for Ed, evaluating 1ef4  ef52 with Eq. 7.36, and using previously determined values

             #             #       #     h4        h5          T01s4       s52
             Ed         Wcv       m4

                        876.8     kJ               kg     c  12825         24032    kJ       298°K 17.2196                7.7392    kJ          d
                                  s           2.08                                  kg                                            kg # °C

                                                    s

                       320.2 kJ /s
302 Chapter 7 Exergy Analysis

  The analysis is summarized by the following exergy balance sheet in terms of exergy magnitudes on a rate basis:

              Net rate of exergy in:                               1772.8 kJ/s (100%)
              Disposition of the exergy:
              · Rate of exergy out                                  876.8 kJ/s (49.5%)
                                                                    209.66 kJ/s (11.8%)
                    power developed                                 366.12 kJ/s (20.6%)
                    water stream                                    320.2 kJ/s (18%)
              · Rate of exergy destruction
                    heat-recovery steam generator
                    turbine

(b) The exergy balance sheet suggests an opportunity for improved thermodynamic performance because about 50% of the
net exergy carried in is either destroyed by irreversibilities or carried out by the water stream. Better thermodynamic per-
formance might be achieved by modifying the design. For example, we might reduce the heat transfer irreversibility by spec-
ifying a heat-recovery steam generator with a smaller stream-to-stream temperature difference, and/or reduce friction by
specifying a turbine with a higher isentropic efficiency. Thermodynamic performance alone would not determine the preferred
option, however, for other factors such as cost must be considered, and can be overriding. Further discussion of the use of
exergy analysis in design is provided in Sec. 7.7.1.

  Alternatively, the rates of #exergy  destruction in  control volumes enclosing the heat-recovery steam generator and turbine
  can be determined using Ed  T0       #  #            is the rate of entropy production for the respective control volume evalu-
                                       scv, where scv

  ated from an entropy rate balance. This is left as an exercise.

                 In previous discussions we have noted the effect of irreversibilities on thermodynamic
              performance. Some economic consequences of irreversibilities are considered in the next
              example.

E X A M P L E 7 . 9 Cost of Exergy Destruction

For the heat pump of Examples 6.8 and 6.14, determine the exergy destruction rates, each in kW, for the compressor, condenser,
and throttling valve. If exergy is valued at $0.08 per kW # h, determine the daily cost of electricity to operate the compressor
and the daily cost of exergy destruction in each component. Let T0  273 K (0C), which corresponds to the temperature of
the outside air.

SOLUTION

Known: Refrigerant 22 is compressed adiabatically, condensed by heat transfer to air passing through a heat exchanger, and
then expanded through a throttling valve. Data for the refrigerant and air are known.

Find: Determine the daily cost to operate the compressor. Also determine the exergy destruction rates and associated daily
costs for the compressor, condenser, and throttling valve.

Schematic and Given Data:
See Examples 6.8 and 6.14.

Assumptions:

1. See Examples 6.8 and 6.14.
2. T0  273 K (0C).

Analysis: The rates of exergy destruction can be calculated using

                                                       #        #
                                                       Ed    T0s
                                                                                                               7.6 Exergetic (Second Law) Efficiency 303

together with data for the entropy production rates from Example 6.8. That is

                                      #          1273  K 2 1 17.5                   1042 a kW b             0.478    kW
                                     1Ed2comp                                                K

                                      #
                                     1Ed2valve  12732 19.94  1042  0.271 kW
                                     #
                                     1Ed2cond  12732 17.95  1042  0.217 kW

The costs of exergy destruction are, respectively

                a Daitloy ccoomstporfesesxoerrgiryredveesrtsriubcitliiotinesdueb    10.478  kW2  a  $0.08      b  `  24 h  `   $0.92
                                                                                                    kW # h           day

                aDirarielvyecrosisbtioliftieexseirngythdeetshtrroutcttliionng dvualevteob  10.271210.082 024 0  $0.52

                aDaiilryrecvoesrtsoibfielixtieersgyindtehsetrcuocntidoennsdeure tob  10.271210.082 024 0  $0.42

From the solution to Example 6.14, the magnitude of the compressor power is 3.11 kW. Thus, the daily cost is

                a Dtoaiolypecroastte ocfoemlepcrtersiscoitry b                    13.11  kW2  a  $0.08   b  `  24 h  `   $5.97
                                                                                                 kW # h        day

 Note that the total cost of exergy destruction in the three components is about 31% of the cost of electricity to operate the

     compressor.

 Associating exergy destruction with operating costs provides a rational basis for seeking cost-effective design improve-

    ments. Although it may be possible to select components that would destroy less exergy, the trade-off between any re-

    sulting reduction in operating cost and the potential increase in equipment cost must be carefully considered.

7.6 Exergetic (Second Law) Efficiency                                                                                                 exergetic efficiency

The objective of this section is to show the use of the exergy concept in assessing the ef-
fectiveness of energy resource utilization. As part of the presentation, the exergetic efficiency
concept is introduced and illustrated. Such efficiencies are also known as second law
efficiencies.

 7.6.1 Matching End Use to Source

Tasks such as space heating, heating in industrial furnaces, and process steam generation
commonly involve the combustion of coal, oil, or natural gas. When the products of com-
bustion are at a temperature significantly greater than required by a given task, the end use
is not well matched to the source and the result is inefficient use of the fuel burned. To il-
lustrate this simply, refer to Fig. 7.7, which shows a closed system receiving a heat transfer

                                   Q· 1
                                                  T1

Air             Q· s                     Q· u
            Ts      System boundary
                                     Tu
      Fuel                                       Figure 7.7 Schematic used to discuss the
                                                efficient use of fuel.
304 Chapter 7 Exergy Analysis

                                      #                                                                #

at the rate Qs at a source temperature Ts and deliverin# g Qu at a use temperature Tu. Energy

is lost to the surroundings by heat transfer at a rate Ql across a portion of the surface at Tl.

All energy transfers shown on the figure are in the directions indicated by the arrows.

Assuming that the system of Fig. 7.7 operates at steady state and there is no work, the

closed system energy and exergy rate balances reduce, respectively, to

                                   0

                               dE        ## #                      #0

                               dt  1Qs  Qu  Ql2  W

                                   0                                                                                               0

                               dE        c a1    T0  b   #     a1      T0  b   #        a1    T0    b   #  d       #0      p0  dV           #
                               dt                Ts     Qs             Tu     Qu              T1       Q1        cW            dt     d  Ed

These equations can be rewritten as follows

                                                                ## #                                                                  (7.37a)
                                                               Qs  Qu  Ql

                                                 a1     T0  b   #      a1        T0  b   #    a1          T0  b   #    #              (7.37b)
                                                        Ts     Qs                Tu     Qu                Tl     Ql    Ed

                                                                                                                       #                       #

Equation 7.37a indicates th#at the energy carried in by heat transfer, Qs, is either used, Qu,

or lost to the surroundings, Ql. This can be described by an efficiency in terms of energy

rates in the form product/input as

                                                                                        #

                                                                              h         Qu                                                     (7.38)
                                                                                         #

                                                                                        Qs

In principle, the value# of h can be increased by applying insulation to reduce the loss. The
limiting value, when Ql  0, is h  1 (100%).

   Equati#on 7.37b shows that the exergy carried into the system accompanying# the hea# t
transfer Qs is either transferred from the system accompanying the heat transfers Qu and Ql

or destroyed by irreversibilities within the system. This can be described by an efficiency in

the form product/input as

                                                                                              #
                                                                              11  T0Tu2Qu
                                                                       e                                                              (7.39a)
                                                                                             #

                                                                              11  T0Ts2Qs

Introducing Eq. 7.38 into Eq. 7.39a results in

                                                                       e      h   1        T0Tu  b                                    (7.39b)
                                                                                 a         T0Ts

                                                                                  1

The parameter e, defined with reference to the exergy concept, may be called an exergetic
efficiency. Note that  and e each gauge how effectively the input is converted to the prod-
uct. The parameter  does this on an energy basis, whereas e does it on an exergy basis. As
discussed next, the value of e is generally less than unity even when   1.

   Equation 7.39b indicates that a value for  as close to unity as practical is important for
proper utilization of the exergy transferred from the hot combustion gas to the system. How-

ever, this alone would not ensure effective utilization. The temperatures Ts and Tu are also
important, with exergy utilization improving as the use temperature Tu approaches the source
temperature Ts. For proper utilization of exergy, therefore, it is desirable to have a value
for  as close to unity as practical and also a good match between the source and use
temperatures.

   To emphasize the central role of temperature in exergetic efficiency considerations, a graph

of Eq. 7.39b is provided in Fig. 7.8. The figure gives the exergetic efficiency e versus the
use temperature Tu for an assumed source temperature Ts  2200 K. Figure 7.8 shows that
e tends to unity (100%) as the use temperature approaches Ts. In most cases, however, the
                                                                                                     7.6 Exergetic (Second Law) Efficiency 305

1.0

                                                                           1 (100%)
                                                                        as Tu  Ts

                                      Heating in industrial furnaces
0.5

                           Process steam generation

                                                                           

                    Space heating

                 300 500 K            1000 K                            1500 K            Tu

 Figure 75.480 E9f0fe0c°Rt of use tempe1r8a0t0u°rRe Tu on the ex2e7r0g0e°tRic efficiency e

(Ts  2200 K, h  100%).

use temperature is substantially below Ts. Indicated on the graph are efficiencies for three
applications: space heating at Tu  320 K, process steam generation at Tu  480 K, and
heating in industrial furnaces at Tu  700 K. These efficiency values suggest that fuel is used
far more effectively in the higher use-temperature industrial applications than in the lower

use-temperature space heating. The especially low exergetic efficiency for space heating re-

flects the fact that fuel is consumed to produce only slightly warm air, which from an ex-

ergy perspective has considerably less utility. The efficiencies given on Fig. 7.8 are actually
on the high side, for in constructing the figure we have assumed  to be unity (100%). More-
over, as additional destruction and loss of exergy would be associated with combustion, the

overall efficiency from fuel input to end use would be much less than indicated by the val-

ues shown on the figure.

COSTING HEAT LOSS. For the system in Fig. 7#.7, it is instructive to c#onsider further the

rate of exergy loss accompanying the heat loss Ql, that is (1  T0T1)Q1. This expression

measures the true thermodynamic value of the heat loss and is graphed in Fig. 7.9. The fig-

ure shows that the thermodynamic value of the heat loss depends s#ignificantly on the tem-
perature at which the heat loss occurs. Stray heat transfer, such as Ql, usually occurs at rel-
atively low temperature, and thus has relatively low thermodynamic value. We might expect

that the economic value of such a loss varies similarly with temperature, and this is the case.

 for example. . . since the source of the exergy loss by heat transfer is the fuel input

(see Fig. 7.7), the economic value of the loss can be accounted for in terms of the unit cost
of fuel based on exergy, cF (in $/kW # h, for example), as follows

                               BCQ#olsattrtaetme opferhaetautreloTslsR       cF  11               #  (7.40)

                                                                                          T0Tl2Ql

              ·
          Ql
                                                 · ····

1 ­ _T_0   ·
    Tl    Ql

              0  1  2       3      4  5       6                                  Tl / T0   Figure 7.9 Effect of the
                                                                                          temperature ratio TlT0 on the
                                                                                          exergy loss associated with heat

                                                                                          transfer.
306 Chapter 7 Exergy Analysis

                                Equation 7.40 shows that the cost of such a loss is less at lower temperatures than at higher
                                temperatures. 

                                    The above example illustrates what we would expect of a rational costing method. It would
                                not be rational to assign the same economic value for a heat transfer occurring near ambi-
                                ent temperature, where the thermodynamic value is negligible, as for an equal heat transfer
                                occurring at a higher temperature, where the thermodynamic value is significant. Indeed, it
                                would be incorrect to assign the same cost to heat loss independent of the temperature at
                                which the loss is occurring. For further discussion of exergy costing, see Sec. 7.7.2.

 7.6.2 Exergetic Efficiencies of Common Components

Exergetic efficiency expressions can take many different forms. Several examples are given
in the current section for thermal system components of practical interest. In every instance,
the efficiency is derived by the use of the exergy rate balance. The approach used here serves
as a model for the development of exergetic efficiency expressions for other components.
Each of the cases considered involves a control volume at steady state, and we assume no
heat transfer between the control volume and its surroundings. The current presentation is
not exhaustive. Many other exergetic efficiency expressions can be written.

TURBINES. For a turbine operating at steady state with no heat transfer with its surround-
ings, the steady-state form of the exergy rate balance, Eq. 7.35, reduces as follows:

                            0

      0    a    a1     T0 b    #               #         #  1  ef1    ef22    #
                       Tj     Qj              Wcv       m                     Ed
             j

This equation can be rearranged to read

                                                   ##

                       ef1               ef2       Wcv      Ed                    (7.41)
                                                     #       #
                                                    m       m

TanhdeTeehxqeeutraegtryimoinsosdnheotshwtersolytehefadtt,otEhf# edEfqml#.o.w7A.4ep1xaeirrsagmtyhedeteedcrerecthareasatessgeabuiengcaefusloshweotwhexeeetfrufgreybcitfnirveoemdlyevttuehrleobpifnlsoewwinoelrexkte, rtWgo# ycevxdmie#t-,.

crease is converted to the desired product is the exergetic turbine efficiency

                             e                 W# cvm#                            (7.42)

                                              ef1  ef2

This particular exergetic efficiency is sometimes refered to as the turbine effectiveness. Care-
fully note that the exergetic turbine efficiency is defined differently from the isentropic tur-
bine efficiency introduced in Sec. 6.8.

    for example. . . the exergetic efficiency of the turbine considered in Example 6.11
is 81.2% when T0  298 K. It is left as an exercise to verify this value. 

COMPRESSORS AND PUMPS. For a compressor or pump operating at steady state with

no heat transfer with its surroundings, the exergy rate balance, Eq. 7.35, can be placed in the

form

                         #                                      #

                    a    Wcv   b              ef2    ef1        Ed
                           #                                     #
                         m                                      m
                                                                                                               7.6 Exergetic (Second Law) Efficiency 307

Hot      2                                        1

stream,
m· h

Cold

stream,
m· c
         3                                        4
                                                           Figure 7.10 Counterflow heat exchanger.

Thus, the exergy input to the device, W# cvm# , is accounted for either as an increase in the

flow exergy between inlet and exit or as exergy destroyed. The effectiveness of the conver-

sion from work input to flow exergy increase is gauged by the exergetic compressor (or pump)

efficiency

                                                      e        ef2  ef1                                                   (7.43)

                                                               1W# cvm# 2

    for example. . . the exergetic efficiency of the compressor considered in Example
6.14 is 84.6% when T0  273 K. It is left as an exercise to verify this value. 

HEAT EXCHANGER WITHOUT MIXING. The heat exchanger shown in Fig. 7.10 operates
at steady state with no heat transfer with its surroundings and both streams at temperatures
above T0. The exergy rate balance, Eq. 7.32a, reduces to

                                   0                  0

            0    a    a1       T0 b   #       #             1   #  hef1      m# cef32      1   #  hef2    m# cef42    #
                               Tj    Qj      Wcv               m                              m                       Ed
                   j

         #                                                                            #
where mh is the mass flow rate of the hot stream and mc is the mass flow rate of the cold

stream. This can be rearranged to read

                                       #  1  ef1      ef22         m# c1ef4         ef32      #                           (7.44)
                                      mh                                                      Ed

   The term on the left of Eq. 7.44 accounts for the decrease in the exergy of the hot stream.
The first term on the right accounts for the increase in exergy of the cold stream. Regarding
the hot stream as supplying the exergy increase of the cold stream as well as the exergy de-
stroyed, we can write an exergetic heat exchanger efficiency as

                                                  e         m# c1ef4         ef32                                         (7.45)
                                                                             ef22
                                                             #     1  ef1
                                                            mh

 for example. . . the exergetic efficiency of the heat exchanger of Example 7.6 is 83.3%.
It is left as an exercise to verify this value. 

DIRECT CONTACT HEAT EXCHANGER. The direct contact heat exchanger shown in
Fig. 7.11 operates at steady state with no heat transfer with its surroundings. The exergy rate
balance, Eq. 7.32a, reduces to

                                             0                        0

                 0        a    a1        T0 b      #      #                m# 1ef1       m# 2ef2    m# 3ef3    #
                                         Tj       Qj     Wcv                                                   Ed
                            j
308 Chapter 7 Exergy Analysis

                                                  1 Hot stream, m· 1

                                         3                           2                           Figure 7.11 Direct contact heat
                     Mixed stream, m· 3                              Cold stream, m· 2          exchanger.

                     With       #     #        #  from  a  mass      rate  balance,  this       can   be  written  as
                               m3    m1       m2

                                                            #  1ef1    ef32       #  1   ef  3    ef 22     #                     (7.46)
                                                           m1                    m2                         Ed

                        The term on the left Eq. 7.46 accounts for the decrease in the exergy of the hot stream
                     between inlet and exit. The first term on the right accounts for the increase in the exergy of
                     the cold stream between inlet and exit. Regarding the hot stream as supplying the exergy in-
                     crease of the cold stream as well as the exergy destroyed by irreversibilities, we can write
                     an exergetic efficiency for a direct contact heat exchanger as

                                                                              #  1  ef3         ef22                              (7.47)
                                                                             m2                 ef32
                                                                       e
                                                                              #  1  ef1
                                                                             m1

cogeneration          7.6.3 Using Exergetic Efficiencies

power recovery       Exergetic efficiencies are useful for distinguishing means for utilizing energy resources that
waste heat recovery  are thermodynamically effective from those that are less so. Exergetic efficiencies also can
                     be used to evaluate the effectiveness of engineering measures taken to improve the per-
                     formance of a thermal system. This is done by comparing the efficiency values determined
                     before and after modifications have been made to show how much improvement has been
                     achieved. Moreover, exergetic efficiencies can be used to gauge the potential for improve-
                     ment in the performance of a given thermal system by comparing the efficiency of the sys-
                     tem to the efficiency of like systems. A significant difference between these values would
                     suggest that improved performance is possible.

                        It is important to recognize that the limit of 100% exergetic efficiency should not be re-
                     garded as a practical objective. This theoretical limit could be attained only if there were no
                     exergy destructions or losses. To achieve such idealized processes might require extremely
                     long times to execute processes and/or complex devices, both of which are at odds with the
                     objective of profitable operation. In practice, decisions are usually made on the basis of total
                     costs. An increase in efficiency to reduce fuel consumption, or otherwise utilize resources
                     better, normally requires additional expenditures for facilities and operations. Accordingly,
                     an improvement might not be implemented if an increase in total cost would result. The trade-
                     off between fuel savings and additional investment invariably dictates a lower efficiency than
                     might be achieved theoretically and may even result in a lower efficiency than could be
                     achieved using the best available technology.

                        Various methods are used to improve energy resource utilization. All such methods must
                     achieve their objectives cost-effectively. One method is cogeneration, which sequentially pro-
                     duces power and a heat transfer (or process steam) for some desired use. An aim of cogen-
                     eration is to develop the power and heat transfer using an integrated system with a total ex-
                     penditure that is less than would be required to develop them individually. Further discussions
                     of cogeneration are provided in Secs. 7.7.2 and 8.5. Two other methods employed to improve
                     energy resource utilization are power recovery and waste heat recovery. Power recovery can
                     be accomplished by inserting a turbine into a pressurized gas or liquid stream to capture some
                     of the exergy that would otherwise be destroyed in a spontaneous expansion. Waste heat re-
                     covery contributes to overall efficiency by using some of the exergy that would otherwise be
                     discarded to the surroundings, as in the exhaust gases of large internal combustion engines.
                     An illustration of waste heat recovery is provided by Example 7.8.
                                                                                                      7.7 Thermoeconomics 309

7.7 Thermoeconomics                                                                                   thermoeconomics

Thermal systems typically experience significant work and/or heat interactions with their sur-
roundings, and they can exchange mass with their surroundings in the form of hot and cold
streams, including chemically reactive mixtures. Thermal systems appear in almost every in-
dustry, and numerous examples are found in our everyday lives. Their design involves the
application of principles from thermodynamics, fluid mechanics, and heat transfer, as well
as such fields as materials, manufacturing, and mechanical design. The design of thermal
systems also requires the explicit consideration of engineering economics, for cost is always
a consideration. The term thermoeconomics may be applied to this general area of applica-
tion, although it is often applied more narrowly to methodologies combining exergy and
economics for optimizing the design and operation of thermal systems.

 7.7.1 Using Exergy in Design

To illustrate the use of exergy in design, consider Fig. 7.12 showing a thermal system consist-
ing of a power-generating unit and a heat-recovery steam generator. The power-generating unit
develops an electric power output and combustion products that enter the heat recovery unit.

                                                                                                  #
Feedwater also enters the heat-recovery steam generator with a mass flow rate of mw, receives
exergy by heat transfer from the combustion gases, and exits as steam at some desired condi-
tion for use in another process. The combustion products entering the heat-recovery steam gen-
erator can be regarded as having economic value. Since the source of the exergy of the com-
bustion products is the fuel input (Fig. 7.12), the economic value can be accounted for in terms
of the cost of fuel, as we have done in Sec. 7.6.1 when costing heat loss.

   From our study of the second law of thermodynamics we know that the average temper-
ature difference, Tave, between two streams passing through a heat exchanger is a measure
of irreversibility and that the irreversibility of the heat transfer vanishes as the temperature
difference approaches zero. For the heat-recovery steam generator in Fig. 7.12, this source
of exergy destruction exacts an economic penalty in terms of fuel cost. Figure 7.13 shows
the annual fuel cost attributed to the irreversibility of the heat exchanger as a function of
Tave. The fuel cost increases with increasing Tave, because the irreversibility is directly
related to the temperature difference.

   From the study of heat transfer, we know that there is an inverse relation between Tave
and the surface area required for a specified heat transfer rate. More heat transfer area means
a larger, more costly heat exchanger--that is, a greater capital cost. Figure 7.13 also shows
the annualized capital cost of the heat exchanger as a function of Tave. The capital cost
decreases as Tave increases.

                            W· e

Fuel
                                                                       Heat-recovery

     Power-generating unit        steam generator                                         Combustion
                                                                                          gases

Air

                                                                   Steam Feedwater, m· w
 Figure 7.12 Figure used to illustrate the use of exergy in design.
310 Chapter 7 Exergy Analysis

Annualized cost, dollars per year  Total cost = Capital Cost + Fuel Cost

                                                 a´ a a´´

                                   Capital cost

                                   Fuel cost

   0                                                   Nearly
     0                                                optimal

 Figure 7.13                           Average temperature difference, Tave
                                   Cost curves for a single heat exchanger.

   The total cost is the sum of the capital cost and the fuel cost. The total cost curve shown
in Fig. 7.13 exhibits a minimum at the point labeled a. Notice, however, that the curve is rel-
atively flat in the neighborhood of the minimum, so there is a range of Tave values that could
be considered nearly optimal from the standpoint of minimum total cost. If reducing the fuel
cost were deemed more important than minimizing the capital cost, we might choose a de-
sign that would operate at point a. Point a would be a more desirable operating point if
capital cost were of greater concern. Such trade-offs are common in design situations.

   The actual design process can differ significantly from the simple case considered here.
For one thing, costs cannot be determined as precisely as implied by the curves in Fig. 7.13.
Fuel prices may vary widely over time, and equipment costs may be difficult to predict as
they often depend on a bidding procedure. Equipment is manufactured in discrete sizes, so
the cost also would not vary continuously as shown in the figure. Furthermore, thermal sys-
tems usually consist of several components that interact with one another. Optimization of
components individually, as considered for the heat exchanger, usually does not guarantee
an optimum for the overall system. Finally, the example involves only Tave as a design vari-
able. Often, several design variables must be considered and optimized simultaneously.

 7.7.2 Exergy Costing of a Cogeneration System

Another important aspect of thermoeconomics is the use of exergy for allocating costs to the
products of a thermal system. This involves assigning to each product the total cost to pro-
duce it, namely the cost of fuel and other inputs plus the cost of owning and operating the
system (e.g., capital cost, operating and maintenance costs). Such costing is a common prob-
lem in plants where utilities such as electrical power, chilled water, compressed air, and steam
are generated in one department and used in others. The plant operator needs to know the
cost of generating each utility to ensure that the other departments are charged properly ac-
cording to the type and amount of each utility used. Common to all such considerations are
fundamentals from engineering economics, including procedures for annualizing costs, ap-
propriate means for allocating costs, and reliable cost data.

   To explore further the costing of thermal systems, consider the simple cogeneration system
operating at steady state shown in Fig. 7.14. The system consists of a boiler and a turbine, with
each having no significant heat transfer to its surroundings. The figure is labeled with exergy
                                                                                                      7.7 Thermoeconomics 311

                 Boiler               E· fP                   Turbine-electric
                                                                 generator
                                         Combustion
                                           products

EF· ufFe,lcF                          High-pressure     Z· t      W· e, ce

                                      steam

EA· fiar                        Z· b  E· f11, c1

              Feedwater                                 2 Low-pressure steam     Figure 7.14 Simple
                         E· fw                          E· f2, c2               cogeneration system.

transfer rates associated with the flowing streams, where the subscripts F, a, P, and w denote

fuel, combustion air, combustion products, and feedwater, respectively. The subscripts 1 and 2

denote high- and low-pressure steam, respectively. Means for evaluating the exergies of the fuel

and combustion products are introduce#d in Chap. 13. The cogeneration system has two prin-
cipal products: electricity, denoted by We, and low-pressure steam for use in some process. The
objective is to determine the cost at which each product is generated.

BOILER ANALYSIS. Let us begin by evaluating the cost of the high-pressure steam pro-

duced by the boiler. For this, we consider a control volume enclosing the boiler. Fuel and air

enter the boiler separately and combustion products exit. Feedwater enters and high-pressure

steam exits. The total cost to produce the exiting streams equals the total cost of the enter-

ing streams plus the cost of owning and operating the boiler. This is expressed by the following

cost rate balance for the boiler

                                      ##### #

                                      C1  CP  CF  Ca  Cw  Zb                                          (7.48)   cost rate balance
                                                                                                               exergy unit cost
              #                                                   #

where C is the cost rate of the respective stream and Zb accounts for the cost rate associated

with owning and opera# ting the boiler (each in $ per hour, for example). In the present dis-

cussion, the cost rate Zb is presumed kn# own from a previous economic analysis.

Although the cost rates denoted by C in Eq. 7.48 are evaluated by various means in prac-

tice, the present discussion features the use of exergy for this purpose. Since exergy meas-

ures the true thermodynamic values of the work, heat, and other interactions between a sys-

tem and its surroundings as well as the effect of irreversibilities within the system, exergy is

a rational basis for assigning costs. With exergy costing, each of the cost rates is evaluated

in terms of the associated rate of exergy transfer and a unit cost. Thus, for an entering or ex-

iting stream, we write

                                                              ##

                                                        C  cEf                                        (7.49)

                                                                                                       #
where c denotes the cost per unit of exergy (in cents per kW # h, for example) and Ef is the

associated exergy transfer rate.

For simplicity, we assume the feedwater and combustion air enter the boiler with negli-

gible exergy and cost, and the combustion products are discharged directly to the surround-

ings with negligible cost. Thus Eq. 7.48 reduces as follows

                                      # #0 # #0 # 0 #
                                      C1  CP  CF  Ca  Cw  Zb

Then, with Eq. 7.49 we have

                                                     #        ##

                                                     c1Ef1  cFEf F  Zb                                (7.50a)
312 Chapter 7 Exergy Analysis

Solving for c1, the unit cost of the high-pressure steam is

                                                 #             #

                                  c1      cF  a  Ef  F  b      Zb                                    (7.50b)
                                                 #             #
                                                               Ef1
                                                 Ef1

This equation shows that the unit cost of the high-pressure steam is determined by two

contributions related, respectively, to the cost of the fuel and the cost of owning and operating

the boiler. Due to exergy destruction and loss,# less# exergy exits the boiler with the high-

pressure steam than enters with the fuel. Thus, Ef F Ef1 is invariably greater than one, and the

unit cost of the high-pressure steam is invariably greater than the unit cost of the fuel.

TURBINE ANALYSIS. Next, consider a control volume enclosing the turbine. The total cost

to produce the electricity and low-pressure steam equals the cost of the entering high-pres-

sure steam plus the cost of owing and operating the device. This is expressed by the cost rate

balance for the turbine

                                     ####

                                     Ce  C2  C1  Zt                                                  (7.51)

                               #                                    #  #

where Ce is the cost rate associated with the electricity, C1 a#nd C2 are the cost rates associ-

ated with the entering and exiting steam, respectively, and Zt accounts for the cost rate as-

s#ocia# ted with# owning and operating the turbine. With exergy costing, each of the cost rates

Ce, C1, and C2 is evaluated in terms of the associated rate of exergy transfer and a unit cost.

Equation 7.51 then appears as

                                  #           #               ##

                                  ceWe  c2Ef2  c1Ef1  Zt                                             (7.52a)

   The unit cost c1 in Eq. 7.52a is given by Eq. 7.50b. In the present discussion, the same
unit cost is assigned to the low-pressure steam; that is, c2  c1. This is done on the basis that

the purpose of the turbine is to generate electricity, and thus all costs associated with own-

ing and operating the turbine should be charged to the power generated. We can regard this

decision as a part of the cost accounting considerations that accompany the thermoeconomic

analysis of thermal systems. With c2  c1, Eq. 7.52a becomes

                                  #              ## #

                                  ceWe  c11Ef1  Ef22  Zt                                             (7.52b)

The first term on the right side accounts for the cost of the exergy used and the second term

accounts for the cost of the system itself.

Solving Eq. 7.52b for ce, and introducing the exergetic turbine efficiency e from Eq. 7.42

                                                           #

                                      ce         c1        Zt                                        (7.52c)
                                                 e          #
                                                           We

This equation shows that the unit cost of the electricity is determined by the cost of the high-
pressure steam and the cost of owning and operating the turbine. Because of exergy de-
struction within the turbine, the exergetic efficiency is invariably less than one, and therefore
the unit cost of electricity is invariably greater than the unit cost of the high-pressure steam.

SUMMARY. By applying cost rate balances to the boiler and the turbine, we are able to de-

termine the cost of each product of the cogeneration system. The unit cost of the electricity

is determined by Eq. 7.52c and the unit cost of the low-pressure steam is determined by the
expression c2  c1 together with Eq. 7.50b. The example to follow provides a detailed
illustration. The same general approach is applicable for costing the products of a wide-
ranging class of thermal systems.1

1See A. Bejan, G. Tsatsaronis, and M. J. Moran, Thermal Design and Optimization, John Wiley & Sons,
New York, 1996.
                                                                                                                             7.7 Thermoeconomics 313

E X A M P L E 7 . 1 0 Exergy Costing of a Cogeneration System

A cogeneration system consists of a natural gas-fueled boiler and a steam turbine that develops power and provides steam for
an industrial process. At steady state, fuel enters the boiler with an exergy rate of 100 MW. Steam exits the boiler at 50 bar,
466C with an exergy rate of 35 MW. Steam exits the turbine at 5 bar, 205C and a mass flow rate of 26.15 kg/s. The unit
cost of the fuel is 1.44 cents per kW # h of exergy. The costs of owning and operating the boiler and turbine are, respectively,
$1080/h and $92/h. The feedwater and combustion air enter with negligible exergy and cost. The combustion products are dis-
charged directly to the surroundings with negligible cost. Heat transfer with the surroundings and kinetic and potential energy
effects are negligible. Let T0  298 K.
(a) For the turbine, determine the power and the rate exergy exits with the steam, each in MW.
(b) Determine the unit costs of the steam exiting the boiler, the steam exiting the turbine, and the power, each in cents per
kW # h of exergy.
(c) Determine the cost rates of the steam exiting the turbine and the power, each in $/h.

SOLUTION

Known: Steady-state operating data are known for a cogeneration system that produces both electricity and low-pressure
steam for an industrial process.

Find: For the turbine, determine the power and the rate exergy exits with the steam. Determine the unit costs of the steam
exiting the boiler, the steam exiting the turbine, and the power developed. Also determine the cost rates of the low-pressure
steam and power.

Schematic and Given Data:

                                       Combustion                 Turbine-electric
                                                                      generator
                            Boiler          products
                                                          Z· t = $92/h W· e, ce
E· fF  Gaseous fuel
 cF
       =  100 MW            Z· b = $1080/h
       =        _c_en_t__s
          1.44  kW·h                               1

                Air                         E· f1 = 35MW
                                             p1 = 50 bar
                                            T1 = 466°C

                                                      Process steam 2  p2 = 5 bar
                                                                                  205°C
                            Feedwater                                  mT· 22  =  26.15 kg/s
                                                                               =
                                                                                               Figure E7.10

Assumptions:

1. Each control volume shown in the accompanying figure is at steady state.
                                     #

2. For each control volume, Qcv  0 and kinetic and potential energy effects are negligible.

3. The feedwater and combustion air enter the boiler with negligible exergy and cost.

4. The combustion products are discharged directly to the surroundings with negligible cost.

5. For the environment, T0  298 K.

Analysis:

(a) With assumption 2, the mass and energy rate balances for a control volume enclosing the turbine reduce at steady state
to give

                                                           #            #  1h1      h22
                                                          We           m
314 Chapter 7 Exergy Analysis

  From Table A-4, h1  3353.54 kJ/kg and h2  2865.96 kJ/kg. Thus

                                            #                kg   b   13353.54              2865.962     a  kJ  b  `   1 MW          `
                                           We        a26.15                                                 kg        103 kJ/s

                                                              s

                                                   12.75 MW

  Using Eq. 7.36, the difference in the rates exergy enters and exits the turbine with the steam is

                                                          #       #          #    1ef2        ef12
                                                          Ef2     Ef1       m

                                                                             #    h2        h1      T01s2       s12
                                                                            m

                 #
  Solving for Ef2

                                                          #       #          #    h2        h1      T01s2       s12
                                                          Ef2     Ef1       m

  With  known  values   for  #    and   #  and    data    from    Table  A-4:           s1    6.8773  kJ/kg     #     K  and  s2        7.0806  kJ/kg      #  K,  the   rate  exergy
                             Ef1       m,

  exits with the steam is

        #           35  MW                kg        c  12865.96          3353.542           kJ      298  K     17.0806        6.87732     kJ         d  `  1 MW      `
        Ef2                       a26.15 b                                                  kg                                          kg # K             103 kJ/s

                                           s

                20.67 MW

  (b) For a control volume enclosing the boiler, the cost rate balance reduces with assumptions 3 and 4 to give

                                                                         #                  ##

                                                                         c1Ef1  cFEfF  Zb

           #
  w# here EfF is the exergy rate of the entering fuel, cF and c1 are the unit costs of the fuel and exiting steam, respectively, and

  Zb is the cost rate associated with the owning and operating the boiler. Solving for c1 and inserting known values

                                               #          #

                                  c1    cF  a  EfF  b     Zb
                                               #          #
                                               Ef1        Ef1

                                        a1.44     cents   b    a  100 MW          b         a1080 $/hb      `  1 MW      `  ` 100 cents `
                                                  kW # h          35 MW                       35 MW            103 kW            1$

                                        14.11          3.092   cents           7.2      cents
                                                               kW # h                   kW # h

  The cost rate balance for the control volume enclosing the turbine is

                                                                      #              #           ##

                                                                  ceWe  c2Ef2  c1Ef1  Zt

                                                                                                                              #

  where ce and c2 are the unit costs of the power and the exiting steam, respectively, and Zt is the cost rate associated with own-

  ing and operating the turbine. Assigning the same unit cost to the steam entering and exiting the turbine, c2  c1 
  7.2 cents/kW # h, and solving for ce

                                                                                  ##                     #

                                                                  ce     c1    c  Ef1       Ef2  d    Zt
                                                                                         #             #
                                                                                                      We
                                                                                        We

  Inserting known values

                           ce     a7.2  cents     b    c  135   20.672 MW               d    a 92$/h b `              1 MW        `     ` 100 cents  `
                                        kW # h                 12.75 MW                          12.75 MW             103 kW                 1$

                                  18.09        0.722      cents          8.81  cents
                                                          kW # h               kW # h
                                                                                                     Key Engineering Concepts 315

  (c) For the low-pressure steam and power, the cost rates are, respectively

                       #    #

                       C2  c2Ef2

                                  cents                                 103 kW         1$
                           a7.2 kW # h b 120.67 MW2                     `       `   `             `
                                                                         1 MW          100 cents

                           $1488/h

                       #       #

                       Ce  ceWe

                            a8.81  cents   b  112.75               MW2  ` 103 kW `     ` 1$ `
                                   kW # h                                1 MW           100 cents

                           $1123/h

   The purpose of the turbine is to generate power, and thus all costs associated with owning and operating the turbine are

      charged to the power generated.

   Observe that the unit costs c1 and ce are significantly greater than the unit cost of the fuel.
   Although the unit cost of the steam is less than the unit cost of the power, the steam cost rate is greater because the as-

      sociated exergy rate is much greater.

  Chapter Summary and Study Guide

In this chapter, we have introduced the property exergy and         write out meanings of the terms listed in the margins
illustrated its use for thermodynamic analysis. Like mass, en-        throughout the chapter and understand each of the
ergy, and entropy, exergy is an extensive property that can be        related concepts. The subset of key concepts listed below
transferred across system boundaries. Exergy transfer ac-             is particularly important.
companies heat transfer, work and mass flow. Like entropy,
exergy is not conserved. Exergy is destroyed within systems         evaluate exergy at a given state using Eq. 7.2 and exergy
whenever internal irreversibilities are present. Entropy pro-         change between two states using Eq. 7.10, each relative
duction corresponds to exergy destruction.                            to a specified reference environment.

   The use of exergy balances is featured in this chapter. Ex-      apply exergy balances in each of several alternative
ergy balances are expressions of the second law that account          forms, appropriately modeling the case at hand, correctly
for exergy in terms of exergy transfers and exergy destruc-           observing sign conventions, and carefully applying SI
tion. For processes of closed systems, the exergy balance is          and English units.
Eq. 7.11 and a corresponding rate form is Eq. 7.17. For con-
trol volumes, rate forms include Eq. 7.31 and the companion         evaluate the specific flow exergy relative to a specified
steady-state expressions given by Eqs. 7.32. Control volume           reference environment using Eq. 7.20.
analyses account for exergy transfer at inlets and exits in terms
of flow exergy.                                                     define and evaluate exergetic efficiencies for thermal
                                                                      system components of practical interest.
   The following checklist provides a study guide for this
chapter. When your study of the text and end-of-chapter ex-         apply exergy costing to heat loss and simple cogenera-
ercises has been completed you should be able to                      tion systems.

  Key Engineering Concepts

exergy p. 273          closed system exergy                        exergy destruction p. 284         exergetic
exergy reference          balance p. 283                           flow exergy p. 290                   efficiency p. 303
                                                                   exergy rate
   environment p. 273  exergy transfer
dead state p. 275         p. 284, 291                                balance p. 285, 294
316 Chapter 7 Exergy Analysis

Exercises: Things Engineers Think About

1. When you hear the term "energy crisis" used by the news me-           7. Can an energy transfer by heat and the associated exergy trans-
dia, do the media really mean exergy crisis?                             fer be in opposite directions? Repeat for work.

2. For each case illustrated in Fig. 5.1 (Sec. 5.1), identify the rel-   8. When evaluating exergy destruction, is it necessary to use an
evant intensive property difference between the system and its           exergy balance?
surroundings that underlies the potential for work. For cases
(a) and (b) discuss whether work could be developed if the par-          9. For a stream of matter, how does the definition of flow exergy
ticular intensive property value for the system were less than for       parallel the definition of enthalpy?
the surroundings.
                                                                         10. Is it possible for the flow exergy to be negative?
3. Is it possible for exergy to be negative? For exergy change to
be negative?                                                             11. Does the exergetic efficiency given by Eq. 7.45 apply when
                                                                         both the hot and cold streams are at temperatures below T0?
4. Does an airborne, helium-filled balloon at temperature T0 and         12. A gasoline-fueled generator is claimed by its inventor to pro-
pressure p0 have exergy?                                                 duce electricity at a lower unit cost than the unit cost of the fuel
5. Does a system consisting of an evacuated space of volume V            used, where each cost is based on exergy. Comment.
have exergy?
                                                                         13. A convenience store sells gasoline and bottled drinking water
6. When an automobile brakes to rest, what happens to the exergy         at nearly the same price per gallon. Comment.
associated with its motion?

Problems: Developing Engineering Skills

Evaluating Exergy                                                           (a) air as an ideal gas at 400C and 0.35 bar.
                                                                            (b) water vapor at 400C and 0.35 bar.
7.1 A system consists of 5 kg of water at 10C and 1 bar. De-
   termine the exergy, in kJ, if the system is at rest and zero ele-        Ignore the effects of motion and gravity and let T0  17C,
   vation relative to an exergy reference environment for which             p0  1 atm.
   T0  20C, p0  1 bar.
                                                                         7.8 Air as an ideal gas is stored in a closed vessel of volume V
7.2 Determine the exergy, in kJ, at 0.7 bar, 90C for 1 kg of                at temperature T0 and pressure p.
   (a) water, (b) Refrigerant 134a, (c) air as an ideal gas with cp
   constant. In each case, the mass is at rest and zero evaluation          (a) Ignoring motion and gravity, obtain the following expres-
   relative to an exergy reference environment for which                         sion for the exergy of the air:
   T0  20C, p0  1 bar.
                                                                                         p pp
7.3 Determine the specific exergy, in kJ/kg, at 0.01C of water           E    p0V  a1              ln                 b
   as a (a) saturated vapor, (b) saturated liquid, (c) saturated solid.                  p0    p0                   p0
   In each case, consider a fixed mass at rest and zero elevation
   relative to an exergy reference environment for which T0                 (b) Using the result of part (a), plot V, in m3, versus pp0 for
   20C, p0  1 bar.                                                               E  1 kW # h and p0  1 bar.

7.4 A balloon filled with helium at 20C, 1 bar and a volume                (c) Discuss your plot in the limits as pp0 S , pp0 S 1, and
   of 0.5 m3 is moving with a velocity of 15 m /s at an elevation              pp0 S 0.
   of 0.5 km relative to an exergy reference environment for which
   T0  20C, p0  1 bar. Using the ideal gas model, determine              7.9 An ideal gas is stored in a closed vessel at pressure p and
   the specific exergy of the helium, in kJ.
                                                                            temperature T.
7.5 Determine the specific exergy, in kJ/kg, at 0.6 bar, 10C
   of (a) ammonia, (b) Refrigerant 22, (c) Refrigerant 134a. Let         (a) If T  T0, derive an expression for the specific exergy in
   T0  0C, p0  1 bar and ignore the effects of motion and                     terms of p, p0, T0, and the gas constant R.
   gravity.
                                                                         (b) If p  p0, derive an expression for the specific exergy in
7.6 Consider a two-phase solid­vapor mixture of water at                      terms of T, T0, and the specific heat cp, which can be taken
   10C. Each phase present has the same mass. Determine the                   as constant.
   specific exergy, in kJ/kg, if T0  20C, p0  1 atm, and there
   are no significant effects of motion or gravity.                      Ignore the effects of motion and gravity.

7.7 Determine the exergy, in kJ, of the contents of a 2-m3               7.10 Equal molar amounts of carbon dioxide and helium are
   storage tank, if the tank is filled with                                 maintained at the same temperature and pressure. Which has the
                                                                            greater value for exergy relative to the same reference environ-
                                                                            ment? Assume the ideal gas model with constant cv for each gas.
                                                                            There are no significant effects of motion and gravity.
                                                                       Problems: Developing Engineering Skills 317

7.11 Refrigerant 134a vapor initially at 1 bar and 20C fills a rigid   Applying the Exergy Balance: Closed Systems
   vessel. The vapor is cooled until the temperature becomes 32C.
   There is no work during the process. For the refrigerant, deter-    7.15 One kilogram of water initially at 1.5 bar and 200C cools
   mine the heat transfer per unit mass and the change in specific        at constant pressure with no internal irreversibilities to a final
   exergy, each in kJ/kg. Comment. Let T0  20C, p0  0.1 MPa.              state where the water is a saturated liquid. For the water as
                                                                          the system, determine the work, the heat transfer, and the
7.12 As shown in Fig. P7.12, two kilograms of water undergo               amounts of exergy transfer accompanying work and heat
   a process from an initial state where the water is saturated vapor     transfer, each in kJ. Let T0  20C, p0  1 bar.
   at 120C, the velocity is 30 m /s, and the elevation is 6 m to a
   final state where the water is saturated liquid at 10C, the         7.16 One kilogram of air initially at 1 bar and 25C is heated
   velocity is 25 m /s, and the elevation is 3 m. Determine in kJ,        at constant pressure with no internal irreversibilities to a final
   (a) the exergy at the initial state, (b) the exergy at the final       temperature of 177C. Employing the ideal gas model, deter-
   state, and (c) the change in exergy. Take T0  25C, p0  1 atm           mine the work, the heat transfer, and the amounts of exergy
   and g  9.8 m /s2.                                                      transfer accompanying work and heat transfer, each in kJ. Let
                                                                          T0  298 K, p0  1 bar.
          Saturated
                                                                       7.17 One kilogram of helium initially at 20C and 1 bar is con-
    1     vapor at 120°C                                                  tained within a rigid, insulated tank. The helium is stirred by
                                                                          a paddle wheel until its pressure is 1.45 bar. Employing the
                     30 m/s                                               ideal gas model, determine the work and the exergy destruc-
                                                                          tion for the helium, each in kJ. Neglect kinetic and potential
                             Saturated                                    energy and let T0  20C, p0  1 bar.

                     2       liquid at 10°C                            7.18 A rigid, well-insulated tank consists of two compartments,
                                                                          each having the same volume, separated by a valve. Initially,
6m                           25 m/s                                       one of the compartments is evacuated and the other contains
                                                                          0.25 kmol of nitrogen gas at 0.35 MPa and 38C. The valve
          3m                                                              is opened and the gas expands to fill the total volume, even-
                                                                          tually achieving an equilibrium state. Using the ideal gas model
       z                     p0 = 1 atm,                                  for the nitrogen

                             T0 = 25°C,                                   (a) determine the final temperature, in C, and final pressure,
                             g = 9.8 m/s2                                      in MPa.

            Figure P7.12                                                  (b) evaluate the exergy destruction, in kJ.
                                                                          (c) What is the cause of exergy destruction in this case?
7.13 Consider 1 kg of steam initially at 20 bar and 240C as
   the system. Determine the change in exergy, in kJ, for each of         Let T0  21C, p0  1 bar.
   the following processes:
                                                                       7.19 One kilogram of Refrigerant 134a is compressed adiabat-
   (a) The system is heated at constant pressure until its volume         ically from the saturated vapor state at 10C to a final state
        doubles.                                                          where the pressure is 8 bar and the temperature is 50C. De-
                                                                          termine the work and the exergy destruction, each in kJ/kg. Let
   (b) The system expands isothermally until its volume                   T0  20C, p0  1 bar.
        doubles.
                                                                       7.20 Two solid blocks, each having mass m and specific heat
   Let T0  20C, p0  1 bar.                                                c, and initially at temperatures T1 and T2, respectively, are
7.14 A flywheel with a moment of inertia of 6.74 kg # m2                  brought into contact, insulated on their outer surfaces, and
                                                                          allowed to come into thermal equilibrium.
   rotates as 3000 RPM. As the flywheel is braked to rest, its
   rotational kinetic energy is converted entirely to internal            (a) Derive an expression for the exergy destruction in terms
   energy of the brake lining. The brake lining has a mass of                  of m, c, T1, T2, and the temperature of the environment, T0.
   2.27 kg and can be regarded as an incompressible solid with
   a specific heat c  4.19 kJ/kg # K. There is no significant heat        (b) Demonstrate that the exergy destruction cannot be
   transfer with the surroundings. (a) Determine the final tem-                negative.
   perature of the brake lining, in C, if its initial temperature is
   16C. (b) Determine the maximum possible rotational speed,              (c) What is the cause of exergy destruction in this case?
   in RPM, that could be attained by the flywheel using energy
   stored in the brake lining after the flywheel has been braked       7.21 As shown in Fig. P7.21, a 0.3 kg metal bar initially at
   to rest. Let T0  16C.                                                  1200 K is removed from an oven and quenched by immers-
                                                                          ing it in a closed tank containing 9 kg of water initially at
                                                                          300 K. Each substance can be modeled as incompressible.
                                                                          An appropriate constant specific heat for the water is cw 
                                                                          4.2 kJ/kg # K, and an appropriate value for the metal is
                                                                          cm  .42 kJ/kg # K. Heat transfer from the tank contents can
                                                                          be neglected. Determine the exergy destruction, in kJ. Let
                                                                          T0  25C.
318 Chapter 7 Exergy Analysis

                               System boundary                            For each device, evaluate, in kW, the rates of exergy transfer
                                                                          accompanying heat and work, and the rate of exergy destruc-
Metal bar:                     Water:                                     tion. Can either device operate as claimed? Let T0  27C.
Tmi = 1200 K
cm = 0.42 kJ/kg·K              Twi = 300 K                             7.25 For the silicon chip of Example 2.5, determine the rate of
mm = 0.3 kg                    cw = 4.2 kJ/kg·K                           exergy destruction, in kW. What causes exergy destruction in
                               mw = 9 kg                                  this case? Let T0  293 K.
 Figure P7.21
                                                                       7.26 Two kilograms of a two-phase liquid­vapor mixture of
7.22 As shown in Fig. P7.22, heat transfer equal to 5 kJ                  water initially at 300C and x1  0.5 undergo the two differ-
   takes place through the inner surface of a wall. Measurements          ent processes described below. In each case, the mixture is
   made during steady-state operation reveal temperatures of              brought from the initial state to a saturated vapor state, while
   T1  1500 K and T2  600 K at the inner and outer surfaces,              the volume remains constant. For each process, determine the
   respectively. Determine, in kJ                                         change in exergy of the water, the net amounts of exergy trans-
                                                                          fer by work and heat, and the amount of exergy destruction,
   (a) the rates of exergy transfer accompanying heat at the in-          each in kJ. Let T0  300 K, p0  1 bar, and ignore the effects
        ner and outer surfaces of the wall.                               of motion and gravity. Comment on the difference between the
                                                                          exergy destruction values.
   (b) the rate of exergy destruction.
   (c) What is the cause of exergy destruction in this case?           (a) The process is brought about adiabatically by stirring the
                                                                            mixture with a paddle wheel.
   Let T0  300 K.
                                                                       (b) The process is brought about by heat transfer from a ther-
                                                                            mal reservoir at 900 K. The temperature of the water at
                                                                            the location where the heat transfer occurs is 900 K.

                                                                       7.27 For the water heater of Problem 6.48, determine the ex-
                                                                          ergy transfer and exergy destruction, each in kJ, for

                                                                       (a) the water as the system.
                                                                       (b) the overall water heater including the resistor as the system.

Q1 = K kJ·                     ·                                          Compare the results of parts (a) and (b), and discuss. Let
                               Q2                                         T0  20C, p0  1 bar.

T1 = 1500 K                    T2 = 600 K                              7.28 For the electric motor of Problem 6.50, evaluate the rate
 Figure P7.22                                                             of exergy destruction and the rate of exergy transfer accompa-
                                                                          nying heat, each in kW. Express each quantity as a percentage
7.23 For the gearbox of Example 6.4(b), develop a full exergy             of the electrical power supplied to the motor. Let T0  293 K.
   accounting of the power input. Compare with the results of
   Example 7.4 and discuss. Let T0  293 K.                             7.29 A thermal reservoir at 1200 K is separated from another
                                                                          thermal reservoir at 300 K by a cylindrical rod insulated on its
7.24 The following steady-state data are claimed for two                  lateral surfaces. At steady state, energy transfer by conduction
   devices:                                                               takes place through the rod. The rod diameter is 2 cm, the
                                                                          length is L, and the thermal conductivity is 0.4 kW/m # K. Plot
Device 1. Heat transfer to the device occurs at a place on its            the following quantities, each in kW, versus L ranging from
      surface where the temperature is 52C. The device delivers           0.01 to 1 m: the rate of conduction through the rod, the rates
      electricity to its surroundings at the rate of 10 kW. There are     of exergy transfer accompanying heat transfer into and out of
      no other energy transfers.                                          the rod, and the rate of exergy destruction. Let T0  300 K.

Device 2. Electricity is supplied to the device at the rate of         7.30 A system undergoes a refrigeration cycle while receiving
      10 kW. Heat transfer from the device occurs at a place on           QC by heat transfer at temperature TC and discharging energy
      its surface where the temperature is 52C. There are no other        QH by heat transfer at a higher temperature TH. There are no
      energy transfers.                                                   other heat transfers.

                                                                       (a) Using an exergy balance, show that the net work input to
                                                                            the cycle cannot be zero.

                                                                       (b) Show that the coefficient of performance of the cycle can
                                                                            be expressed as

                                                                       ba         TC     b a1    T0  1   THEd  QC  2  b
                                                                              TH      TC                QH 

                                                                       where Ed is the exergy destruction and T0 is the tempera-
                                                                       ture of the exergy reference environment.
                                                                        Problems: Developing Engineering Skills 319

(c) Using the result of part (b), obtain an expression for the          7.37 Water vapor enters a valve with a mass flow rate of
    maximum theoretical value for the coefficient of                       2.7 kg/s at a temperature of 280C and a pressure of 30 bar
    performance.                                                           and undergoes a throttling process to 20 bar.

Applying the Exergy Balance: Control Volumes                               (a) Determine the flow exergy rates at the valve inlet and exit
                                                                                and the rate of exergy destruction, each in kW.
7.31 The following conditions represent the state at the inlet to
   a control volume. In each case, evaluate the specific exergy            (b) Evaluating exergy at 8 cents per kW · h, determine the
   and the specific flow exergy, each in kJ/kg. The velocity is rel-            annual cost associated with the exergy destruction, as-
   ative to an exergy reference environment for which T0  20C,                  suming 7500 hours of operation annually.
   p0  1 bar. The effect of gravity can be neglected.
                                                                           Let T0  25C, p0  1 atm.
   (a) water vapor at 100 bar, 520C, 100 m/s.
   (b) Ammonia at 3 bar, 0C, 5 m /s.                                    7.38 Steam enters a turbine operating at steady state at 6 MPa,
   (c) nitrogen (N2) as an ideal gas at 50 bar, 527C, 200 m /s.            500C with a mass flow rate of 400 kg/s. Saturated vapor exits
                                                                           at 8 kPa. Heat transfer from the turbine to its surroundings takes
7.32 For an ideal gas with constant specific heat ratio k, show            place at a rate of 8 MW at an average surface temperature of
   that in the absence of significant effects of motion and grav-          180C. Kinetic and potential energy effects are negligible.
   ity the specific flow exergy can be expressed as
                                                                           (a) For a control volume enclosing the turbine, determine the
ef  T    T   p 1k12k                                                            power developed and the rate of exergy destruction, each
      1  ln  ln a b                                                             in MW.
cpT0 T0  T0  p0
                                                                           (b) If the turbine is located in a facility where the ambient
(a) For k  1.2 develop plots of efcpT0 versus TT0 for                           temperature is 27C, determine the rate of exergy de-
     pp0  0.25, 0.5, 1, 2, 4. Repeat for k  1.3 and 1.4.                        struction for an enlarged control volume that includes the
                                                                                turbine and its immediate surroundings so the heat trans-
(b) The specific flow exergy can take on negative values when                   fer takes place from the control volume at the ambient tem-
                                                                                perature. Explain why the exergy destruction values of
     pp0  1. What does a negative value mean physically?                        parts (a) and (b) differ.

7.33 A geothermal source provides a stream of liquid water at              Let T0  300 K, p0  100 kPa.

   temperature T ( T0) and pressure p. Using the incompress-            7.39 Air at 1 bar, 17C, and a mass flow rate of 0.3 kg/s enters
   ible liquid model, develop a plot of efcT0, where ef is the spe-        an insulated compressor operating at steady state and exits at
   cific flow exergy and c is the specific heat, versus TT0 for            3 bar, 147C. Determine, the power required by the compres-
   pp0  1.0, 1.5, and 2.0. Neglect the effects of motion and               sor and the rate of exergy destruction, each in kW. Express the
   gravity. Let T0  60F, p0  1 atm.                                        rate of exergy destruction as a percentage of the power required
                                                                           by the compressor. Kinetic and potential energy effects are neg-
7.34 The state of a flowing gas is defined by h, s, V, and z,              ligible. Let T0  17C, p0  1 bar.
   where velocity and elevation are relative to an exergy refer-
   ence environment for which the temperature is T0 and the pres-       7.40 Refrigerant 134a at 10C, 1.4 bar, and a mass flow rate
   sure is p0. Determine the maximum theoretical work, per unit            of 280 kg/h enters an insulated compressor operating at steady
   mass of gas flowing, that could be developed by any one-inlet,          state and exits at 9 bar. The isentropic compressor efficiency
   one-exit control volume at steady state that would reduce the           is 82%. Determine
   stream to the dead state at the exit while allowing heat transfer
   only at T0. Using your final expression, interpret the specific         (a) the temperature of the refrigerant exiting the compressor,
   flow exergy.                                                                 in C.

7.35 Steam exits a turbine with a mass flow rate of 2  105                 (b) the power input to the compressor, in kW.
   kg/h at a pressure of 0.008 MPa, a quality of 94%, and a ve-            (c) the rate of exergy destruction expressed as a percentage of
   locity of 70 m /s. Determine the maximum theoretical power
   that could be developed, in MW, by any one-inlet, one-exit                  the power required by the compressor.
   control volume at steady state that would reduce the steam to
   the dead state at the exit while allowing heat transfer only at         Neglect kinetic and potential energy effects and let T0  20C,
   temperature T0. The velocity is relative to an exergy reference         p0  1 bar.
   environment for which T0  15C, p0  0.1 MPa. Neglect the
   effect of gravity.                                                   7.41 Water vapor at 4.0 MPa and 400C enters an insulated tur-
                                                                           bine operating at steady state and expands to saturated vapor at
7.36 Water at 25C, 1 bar is drawn from a mountain lake 1 km                0.1 MPa. Kinetic and potential energy effects can be neglected.
   above a valley and allowed to flow through a hydraulic
   turbine-generator to a pond on the valley floor. For operation          (a) Determine the work developed and the exergy destruction,
   at steady state, determine the minimum theoretical mass flow                 each in kJ per kg of water vapor passing through the turbine.
   rate, in kg /s, required to generate electricity at a rate of 1 MW.
   Let T0  25C, p0  1 bar.                                                 (b) Determine the maximum theoretical work per unit of mass
                                                                                flowing, in kJ/kg, that could be developed by any one-
                                                                                inlet, one-exit control volume at steady state that has wa-
                                                                                ter vapor entering and exiting at the specified states, while
                                                                                allowing heat transfer only at temperature T0.
320 Chapter 7 Exergy Analysis

   Compare the results of parts (a) and (b) and comment. Let            7.48 Saturated water vapor at 0.008 MPa and a mass flow rate
   T0  27C, p0  0.1 MPa.                                                   of 2.6  105 kg/h enters the condenser of a 100-MW power
                                                                           plant and exits as a saturated liquid at 0.008 MPa. The cool-
7.42 Air enters an insulated turbine operating at steady state at          ing water stream enters at 15C and exits at 35C with a neg-
   8 bar, 500 K, and 150 m/s. At the exit the conditions are 1 bar,        ligible change in pressure. At steady state, determine
   320 K, and 10 m/s. There is no significant change in eleva-             (a) the net rate energy exits the plant with the cooling water
   tion. Determine                                                              stream, in MW.
                                                                           (b) the net rate exergy exits the plant with the cooling water
   (a) the work developed and the exergy destruction, each in kJ                stream, in MW.
        per kg of air flowing.
                                                                           Compare these values. Is the loss with the cooling water sig-
   (b) the maximum theoretical work, in kJ per kg of air flow-             nificant? What are some possible uses for the exiting cooling
        ing, that could be developed by any one-inlet, one-exit con-       water? Let T0  20C, p0  0.1 MPa.
        trol volume at steady state that has air entering and exit-
        ing at the specified states, while allowing heat transfer only  7.49 Air enters a counterflow heat exchanger operating at
        at temperature T0.                                                 steady state at 22C, 0.1 MPa and exits at 7C. Refrigerant
                                                                           134a enters at 0.2 MPa, a quality of 0.2, and a mass flow rate
   Compare the results of parts (a) and (b) and comment. Let               of 30 kg/h. Refrigerant exits at 0C. There is no significant
   T0  300 K, p0  1 bar.                                                   change in pressure for either stream.
                                                                           (a) For the Refrigerant 134a stream, determine the rate of heat
7.43 For the compressor of Problem 6.84, determine the rate                     transfer, in kJ/h.
   of exergy destruction and the rate of exergy transfer accom-            (b) For each of the streams, evaluate the change in flow exergy
   panying heat, each in kJ per kg of air flow. Express each as a               rate, in kJ/h. Compare the values.
   percentage of the work input to the compressor. Let T0  20C,
   p0  1 atm.                                                              Let T0  22C, p0  0.1 MPa, and ignore the effects of motion
                                                                           and gravity.
7.44 A compressor fitted with a water jacket and operating at
   steady state takes in air with a volumetric flow rate of 900 m3/h    7.50 Determine the rate of exergy destruction, in kW, for
   at 22C, 0.95 bar and discharges air at 317C, 8 bar. Cooling
   water enters the water jacket at 20C, 100 kPa with a mass               (a) the computer of Example 4.8, when air exits at 32C.
   flow rate of 1400 kg/h and exits at 30C and essentially the             (b) the computer of Problem 4.70, ignoring the change in pres-
   same pressure. There is no significant heat transfer from the
   outer surface of the water jacket to its surroundings, and ki-               sure between the inlet and exit.
   netic and potential energy effects can be ignored. For the water-       (c) the water-jacketed electronics housing of Problem 4.71,
   jacketed compressor, perform a full exergy accounting of the
   power input. Let T0  20C, p0  1 atm.                                        when water exits at 24C.

7.45 Steam at 1.4 MPa and 350C with a mass flow rate of                    Let T0  293 K, p0  1 bar.
   0.125 kg/s enters an insulated turbine operating at steady state
   and exhausts at 100 kPa. Plot the temperature of the exhaust         7.51 Determine the rate of exergy destruction, in kW, for the
   steam, in C, the power developed by the turbine, in kW, and             electronics-laden cylinder of Problems 4.73 and 6.108. Let
   the rate of exergy destruction within the turbine, in kW, each          T0  293 K, p0  1 bar.
   versus the isentropic turbine efficiency ranging from 0 to
   100%. Neglect kinetic and potential energy effects. Let T0           7.52 Helium gas enters an insulated nozzle operating at steady
   20C, p0  0.1 MPa.                                                       state at 1300 K, 4 bar, and 10 m/s. At the exit, the temperature
                                                                           and pressure of the helium are 900 K and 1.45 bar, respec-
7.46 If the power-recovery device of Problem 6.102 develops                tively. Determine
   a net power of 6 kW, determine, in kW
                                                                           (a) the exit velocity, in m /s.
   (a) the rate exergy enters accompanying heat transfer.                  (b) the isentropic nozzle efficiency.
   (b) the net rate exergy is carried in by the steam.                     (c) the rate of exergy destruction, in kJ per kg of gas flowing
   (c) the rate of exergy destruction within the device.
                                                                               through the nozzle.
   Let T0  293 K, p0  1 bar.
                                                                           Assume the ideal gas model for helium and ignore the effects
7.47 A counterflow heat exchanger operating at steady state has            of gravity. Let T0  20C, p0  1 atm.
   ammonia entering at 60C, 14 bar with a mass flow rate of
   0.5 kg/s and exiting as saturated liquid at 14 bar. Air enters in    7.53 As shown schematically in Fig. P7.53, an open feedwater
   a separate stream at 300 K, 1 bar and exits at 335 K with a             heater in a vapor power plant operates at steady state with liq-
   negligible change in pressure. Heat transfer between the heat           uid entering at inlet 1 with T1  40C and p1  7.0 bar. Water
   exchanger and its surroundings is negligible as are changes in          vapor at T2  200C and p2  7.0 bar enters at inlet 2. Saturated
   kinetic and potential energy. Determine                                 liquid water exits with a pressure of p3  7.0 bar. Ignoring
                                                                           heat transfer with the surroundings and all kinetic and potential
   (a) the change in the flow exergy rate of each stream, in kW.           energy effects, determine
   (b) the rate of exergy destruction in the heat exchanger, in kW.
                                                                          (a) the ratio of mass flow rates, m# 1m# 2.
   Let T0  300 K, p0  1 bar.
                                                                           (b) the rate of exergy destruction, in kJ per kg of liquid
                                                                                exiting.

                                                                           Let T0  25C, p0  1 atm.
                                                                     Problems: Developing Engineering Skills 321

Liquid water 1       Water vapor                                     7.60 For the compressor and heat exchanger of Problem 6.88,
 40°C, 7 bar    2 200°C, 7 bar                                          develop a full exergy accounting, in kW, of the compressor
                                                                        power input. Let T0  300 K, p0  96 kPa.
                                             3
                                                                     Using Exergetic Efficiencies
                                  Saturated liquid
                                         7 bar                       7.61 Plot the exergetic efficiency given by Eq. 7.39b versus
                                                                        TuT0 for TsT0  8.0 and   0.4, 0.6, 0.8, 1.0. What can be
        Figure P7.53                                                    learned from the plot when TuT0 is fixed? When e is fixed?
                                                                        Discuss.
7.54 Reconsider the open feedwater heater of Problem 6.87a.
   For an exiting mass flow rate of 1 kg/s, determine the cost of    7.62 The temperature of water contained in a closed, well-
   the exergy destroyed for 8000 hours of operation annually.           insulated tank is increased from 15 to 50C by passing an
   Evaluate exergy at 8 cents per kW · h. Let T0  20C, p0               electric current through a resistor within the tank. Devise and
   1 atm.                                                               evaluate an exergetic efficiency for this water heater. Assume
                                                                        that the water is incompressible and the states of the resistor
7.55 Steam at 3 MPa and 700C is available at one location               and the enclosing tank do not change. Let T0  15C.
   in an industrial plant. At another location, steam at 2 MPa,
   400C, and a mass flow rate of 1 kg/s is required for use in       7.63 Measurements during steady-state operation indicate that
   a certain process. An engineer suggests that steam at this           warm air exits a hand-held hair dryer at a temperature of 83C
   condition can be provided by allowing the higher-pressure            with a velocity of 9.1 m /s through an area of 18.7 cm2. As
   steam to expand through a valve to 2 MPa and then flow               shown in Fig. P7.63, air enters the dryer at a temperature of
   through a heat exchanger where the steam cools at constant           22C and a pressure of 1 bar with a velocity of 3.7 m/s. No
   pressure to 400C by heat transfer to the surroundings, which         significant change in pressure between inlet and exit is ob-
   are at 20C.                                                          served. Also, no significant heat transfer between the dryer and
                                                                        its surroundings occurs, and potential energy effects can be ig-
   (a) Determine the total rate of exergy destruction, in kW, that      n#ored. Let T0  22C. For the hair dryer (a) evaluate the power
        would result from the implementation of this suggestion.        Wcv, in kW, and (b) devise and evaluate an exergetic efficiency.

   (b) Evaluating exergy at 8 cents per kW # h, determine the                      2  T2 = 83°C
        annual cost of the exergy destruction determined in part
        (a) for 8000 hours of operation annually.                    Air              p2 = 1 bar

   Would you endorse this suggestion? Let T0  20C, p0                T1 = 22°C 1      V2 = 9.1 m/s
   0.1 MPa.                                                          p1 = 1 bar       A2 = 18.7 cm2
                                                                     V1 = 3.7 m/s
7.56 For the compressor and turbine of Problem 6.110, deter-
   mine the rates of exergy destruction, each in kJ per kg of                                  +­
   air flowing. Express each as a percentage of the net work de-            Figure P7.63
   veloped by the power plant. Let T0  22C, p0  0.95 bar.
                                                                     7.64 From an input of electricity, an electric resistance furnace
7.57 For the turbines and heat exchanger of Problem 4.57, de-           operating at steady s#tate delivers energy by heat transfer to a
   termine the rates of exergy destruction, each in kW. Place in        process at the rate Qu at a use temperature Tu. There are no
   rank order, beginning with the component contributing most           other significant energy transfers.
   to inefficient operation of the overall system. Let T0  300 K,
   p0  1 bar.                                                           (a) Devise an exergetic efficiency for the furnace.
                                                                        (b) Plot the efficiency obtained in part (a) versus the use tem-
7.58 For the turbine, condenser, and pump of Problem 4.59, de-
   termine the rates of exergy destruction, each in kW. Place in             perature ranging from 300 to 900 K. Let T0  20C.
   rank order, beginning with the component contributing most        7.65 Hydrogen at 25 bar, 450C enters a turbine and expands
   to inefficient operation of the overall system. Let T0  293 K,
   p0  1 bar.                                                           to 2 bar, 160C with a mass flow rate of 0.2 kg/s. The turbine
                                                                        operates at steady state with negligible heat transfer with its
7.59 If the gas turbine power plant of Problem 6.74 develops            surroundings. Assuming the ideal gas model with k  1.37 and
   a net power output of 0.7 MW, determine, in MW,                      neglecting kinetic and potential energies, determine

   (a) the rate of exergy transfer accompanying heat transfer to        (a) the isentropic turbine efficiency.
        the air flowing through the heat exchanger.

   (b) the net rate exergy is carried out by the air stream.
   (c) the total rate of exergy destruction within the power plant.

   Let T0  295 K (22C), p0  0.95 bar.
322 Chapter 7 Exergy Analysis

   (b) the exergetic turbine efficiency.                              7.71 Liquid water at 95C, 1 bar enters a direct-contact heat ex-
                                                                         changer operating at steady state and mixes with a stream of
   Let T0  25C, p0  1 atm.                                               liquid water entering at 15C, 1 bar. A single liquid stream ex-
                                                                         its at 1 bar. The entering streams have equal mass flow rates.
7.66 An ideal gas with constant specific heat ratio k enters a           Neglecting heat transfer with the surroundings and kinetic and
   turbine operating at steady state at T1 and p1 and expands adi-       potential energy effects, determine for the heat exchanger
   abatically to T2 and p2. When would the value of the exergetic
   turbine efficiency exceed the value of the isentropic turbine ef-     (a) the rate of exergy destruction, in kJ per kg of liquid
   ficiency? Discuss. Ignore the effects of motion and gravity.               exiting.

7.67 Air enters an insulated turbine operating at steady state           (b) the exergetic efficiency given by Eq. 7.47.
   with a pressure of 4 bar, a temperature of 450 K, and a volu-
   metric flow rate of 5 m3/s. At the exit, the pressure is 1 bar.       Let T0  15C, p0  1 bar.
   The isentropic turbine efficiency is 84%. Ignoring the effects
   of motion and gravity, determine                                   7.72 Refrigerant 134a enters a counterflow heat exchanger op-
                                                                         erating at steady state at 20C and a quality of 35% and ex-
   (a) the power developed and the exergy destruction rate, each         its as saturated vapor at 20C. Air enters as a separate stream
        in kW.                                                           with a mass flow rate of 4 kg/s and is cooled at a constant pres-
                                                                         sure of 1 bar from 300 to 260 K. Heat transfer between the
   (b) the exergetic turbine efficiency.                                 heat exchanger and its surroundings can be ignored, as can all
                                                                         changes in kinetic and potential energy.
   Let T0  20C, p0  1 bar.
                                                                         (a) As in Fig. E7.6, sketch the variation with position of the
7.68 Argon enters an insulated turbine operating at steady state              temperature of each stream. Locate T0 on the sketch.
   at 1000C and 2 MPa and exhausts at 350 kPa. The mass flow
   rate is 0.5 kg/s. Plot each of the following versus the turbine       (b) Determine the rate of exergy destruction within the heat
   exit temperature, in C                                                     exchanger, in kW.

   (a) the power developed, in kW.                                       (c) Devise and evaluate an exergetic efficiency for the heat
   (b) the rate of exergy destruction in the turbine, in kW.                 exchanger.
   (c) the exergetic turbine efficiency.
                                                                         Let T0  300 K, p0  1 bar.
   Neglect kinetic and potential energy effects. Let T0  20C,
   p0  1 bar.                                                         7.73 Determine the exergetic efficiencies of the turbines and
                                                                         heat exchanger of Problem 4.57. Let T0  300 K, p0  1 bar.
7.69 A compressor operating at steady state takes in 1980 kg/h
   of air at 1 bar and 25C and compresses it to 10 bar and 200C.      7.74 Determine the exergetic efficiencies of the compressor and
   The power input to the compressor is 160 kW, and heat trans-          condenser of the heat pump system of Examples 6.8 and 6.14.
   fer occurs from the compressor to the surroundings at an              Let T0  273 K, p0  1 bar.
   average surface temperature of 60C.
                                                                      7.75 Determine the exergetic efficiencies of the compressor
   (a) Perform a full exergy accounting of the power input to the        and heat exchanger of Problem 6.88. Let T0  300 K, p0 
        compressor.                                                      96 kPa.

   (b) Devise and evaluate an exergetic efficiency for the            7.76 Determine the exergetic efficiencies of the steam genera-
        compressor.                                                      tor and turbine of Examples 4.10 and 7.8. Let T0  298C, p0
                                                                          1 atm.
   (c) Evaluating exergy at 8 cents per kW · h, determine the
       hourly costs of the power input, exergy loss associated with   Considering Thermoeconomics
       heat transfer, and exergy destruction.
                                                                      7.77 The total cost rate for a device varies with the pressure
   Neglect kinetic and potential energy changes. Let T0  25C,
   p0  1 bar.                                                         drop for flow through the device, ( p1  p2), as follows:

7.70 In the boiler of a power plant are tubes through which wa-       #    c11  p1    p2213        c21  p1    p22
   ter flows as it is brought from 0.8 MPa, 150C to 240C at es-       C
   sentially constant pressure. The total mass flow rate of the wa-
   ter is 100 kg/s. Combustion gases passing over the tubes cool      where the c's are constants incorporating economic factors.
   from 1067 to 547C at essentially constant pressure. The com-
   bustion gases can be modeled as air as an ideal gas. There is      The first term on the right side of this equation accounts for
   no significant heat transfer from the boiler to its surroundings.
   Assuming steady state and neglecting kinetic and potential en-     the capital cost and the second term on the right accounts for
   ergy effects, determine
                                                                      the operating cost (pumping power).
   (a) the mass flow rate of the combustion gases, in kg/s.                                     #
   (b) the rate of exergy destruction, in kJ/s.
   (c) the exergetic efficiency given by Eq. 7.45.                    (a) Sketch a plot of C versus ( p1  p2).
                                                                      (b) At the point of minimum total cost rate, evaluate the con-
   Let T0  25C, p0  1 atm.
                                                                           tributions of the capital and operating cost rates to the total

                                                                           cost rate, each in percent. Discuss.

                                                                      7.78 A system# operating at steady state generates# electric#ity
                                                                         at the rate We. The cost rate of the fuel input is CF  cFEfF,
                                                                               Problems: Developing Engineering Skills 323

where cF is the unit cost of fuel based on exergy. The cost of                 7.81 A cogeneration system operating at steady state is shown
owning and operating the system is                                                schematically in Fig. P7.81. The exergy transfer rates of the
                                                                                  entering and exiting streams are shown on the figure, in MW.
                         #       ca    e   b   #                                  The fuel, produced by reacting coal with steam, has a unit
                         Z          1     e   We                                  cost of 5.85 cents per kW # h of exergy. The cost of owning
                                                                                  and operating the system is $1800/h. The feedwater and com-
               ##                                                                 bustion air enter with negligible exergy and cost. The com-
                                                                                  bustion products are discharged directly to the surroundings
where e # WeEf#F, and c is a constant incorporating economic                      with negligible cost. Heat transfer with the surroundings can
                                                                                  be ignored.
factors. CF and Z are the only significant cost rates for the
                                                                                  (a) Determine the rate of exergy destruction within the
system.                                                                                cogeneration system, in MW.

   (a) Derive an e# xpression for the unit cost of electricity, ce,               (b) Devise and evaluate an exergetic efficiency for the system.
        based on We in terms of e and the ratios cecF and ccF                     (c) Assuming the power and steam each have the same unit
        only.
                                                                                      cost based on exergy, evaluate the unit cost, in cents per
   (b) For fixed ccF, derive an expression for the value of e cor-                    kW # h. Also evaluate the cost rates of the power and steam,
        responding to the minimum value of cecF.                                      each in $/h.

   (c) Plot the ratio cecF versus e for ccF  0.25, 1.0, and 4.0.                                           Cogeneration system  CE· ofPm=bu5sMtioWn products
       For each specified ccF, evaluate the minimum value of                                                                           2 ES· tfe2a=m15 MW
       cecF and the corresponding value of e.
                                                                                                                                           PW·oew=er25 MW
7.79 At steady state, a turbine with an exergetic efficiency of                                                                        3
   85% develops 18  107 kW · h of work annually (8000 oper-

   ating hours). The annual cost of owning and operating the
   turbine is $5.0  105. The steam entering the turbine has a
   specific flow exergy of 645 Btu/lb, a mass flow rate of 32 
   104 lb/h, and is valued at $0.0182 per kW · h of exergy.

(a) Evaluate the unit cost of the power developed, in $ per                                       1 Fuel   Z· = $1800/h
     kW # h.                                                                                E· fF = 80 MW
                                                                               cF = 5.85 cents per kW·h
(b) Evaluate the unit cost based on exergy of the steam en-
     tering and exiting the turbine, each in cents per lb of steam                            Combustion   Feedwater
     flowing through the turbine.                                                                  air

7.80 Figure P7.80 shows a boiler at steady state. Steam hav-                    Figure P7.81
   ing a specific flow exergy of 1300 kJ/kg exits the boiler at a
   mass flow rate of 5.69  104 kg/h. The cost of owning and                    7.82 Consider an overall control volume comprising the boiler
   operating the boiler is $91/h. The ratio of the exiting steam                  and steam turbine of the cogeneration system of Example 7.10.
   exergy to the entering fuel exergy is 0.45. The unit cost of                   Assuming the power and process steam each have the same
   the fuel based on exergy is $1.50 per 106 kJ. If the cost rates                unit cost based on exergy: ce  c2, evaluate the unit cost, in
   of the combustion air, feedwater, heat transfer with the                       cents per kW # h. Compare with the respective values obtained
   surroundings, and exiting combustion products are ignored,                     in Example 7.10 and comment.
   develop
                                                                               7.83 The table below gives alternative specifications for the
(a) an expression for the unit cost based on exergy of the steam                  state of the process steam exiting the turbine of Example 7.10.
     exiting the boiler.                                                          The cost of own#ing and operating the tu# rbine, in# $/h, varies
                                                                                  with the power We, in MW, according to Zt  7.2We. All other
(b) Using the result of part (a), determine the unit cost of the                  data remain unchanged.
     steam, in cents per kg of steam flowing.

                         Boiler           Combustion                           p2 1bar2 40 30 20                         9      5  21
                                            products

                   Fuel     Z· b = $91/h      Steam                            T21C2 436 398 349 262 205 128 sat
cF = $1.50 per 106 kJ
                                                     em·f  =  1300 kJ/kg
                                                           =  5.69 × 104 kg/h  Plot versus p2, in bar
                                                                                                  #
Air
                                                                               (a) the power We, in MW.
                            Feedwater                                          (b) the unit costs of the power and process steam, each in cents

 Figure P7.80                                                                       per kW # h of exergy.

                                                                               (c) the unit cost of the process steam, in cents per kg of steam

                                                                                   flowing.
324 Chapter 7 Exergy Analysis

Design & Open Ended Problems: Exploring Engineering Practice

7.1D A utility charges households the same per kW · h for space            discharges exergy by heat transfer to the natural environment.
   heating via steam radiators as it does for electricity. Critically      Discuss practical difficulties that require actual power plant op-
   evaluate this costing practice and prepare a memorandum sum-            eration to depart from your theoretical cycle.
   marizing your principal conclusions.
                                                                        7.6D Define and evaluate an exergetic efficiency for an electric
7.2D For what range of steam mass flow rates, in kg/s, would               heat pump system for a 2500 ft2 dwelling in your locale. Use
   it be economically feasible to replace the throttling valve of          manufacturer's data for heat pump operation.
   Example 7.5 with a power recovery device? Provide support-
   ing calculations. What type of device might you specify?             7.7D Using the key words exergetic efficiency, second law
   Discuss.                                                                efficiency, and rational efficiency, develop a bibliography of
                                                                           recent publications discussing the definition and use of such
7.3D A vortex tube is a device having no moving mechanical                 efficiencies for power systems and their components. Write a
   parts that converts an inlet stream of compressed air at an in-         critical review of one of the publications you locate. Clearly
   termediate temperature into two exiting streams, one cold and           state the principal contribution(s) of the publication.
   one hot.
                                                                        7.8D The initial plans for a new factory space specify 1000 flu-
   (a) A product catalogue indicates that 20% of the air entering          orescent light fixtures, each with two 8-ft conventional tubes
        a vortex tube at 21C and 5 bar exits at 37C and 1 bar              sharing a single magnetic ballast. The lights will operate from
        while the rest exits at 34.2C and 1 bar. An inventor pro-          7 AM to 10 PM, 5 days per week, 350 days per year. More ex-
        poses operating a power cycle between the hot and cold             pensive high-efficiency tubes are available that require more
        streams. Critically evaluate the feasibility of this proposal.     costly electronic ballasts but use considerably less electricity
                                                                           to operate. Considering both initial and operating costs, deter-
   (b) Obtain a product catalogue from a vortex tube vendor lo-            mine which lighting system is best for this application, and
        cated with the help of the Thomas Register of American             prepare a report of your findings. Use manufacturer's data and
        Manufacturers. What are some of the applications of                industrial electric rates in your locale to estimate costs. As-
        vortex tubes?                                                      sume that comparable lighting levels would be achieved by the
                                                                           conventional and high-efficiency lighting.
7.4D A government agency has solicited proposals for tech-
   nology in the area of exergy harvesting. The aim is to develop       7.9D A factory has a 120 kW screw compressor that takes in
   small-scale devices to generate power for rugged-duty appli-            0.5 m3/s of ambient air and delivers compressed air at 1 MPa
   cations with power requirements ranging from hundreds of mil-           for actuating pneumatic tools. The factory manager read in a
   liwatts to several watts. The power must be developed from              plant engineering magazine that using compressed air is more
   only ambient sources, such as thermal and chemical gradients,           expensive than the direct use of electricity for operating such
   naturally occurring fuels (tree sap, plants, waste matter, etc.),       tools and asks for your opinion. Using exergy costing with
   wind, solar, sound and vibration, and mechanical motion in-             electric rates in your locale, what do you say?
   cluding human motion. The devices must also operate with lit-
   tle or no human intervention. Devise a system that would meet        7.10D Pinch analysis (or pinch technology) is a popular
   these requirements. Clearly identify its intended application           methodology for optimizing the design of heat exchanger net-
   and explain its operating principles. Estimate its size, weight,        works in complex thermal systems. Pinch analysis uses a pri-
   and expected power output.                                              marily graphical approach to implement second-law reason-
                                                                           ing. Write a paper discussing the role of pinch analysis within
7.5D In one common arrangement, the exergy input to a power                thermoeconomics.
   cycle is obtained by heat transfer from hot products of com-
   bustion cooling at approximately constant pressure, while ex-        7.11D Wind Power Looming Large (see box Sec. 7.4) Iden-
   ergy is discharged by heat transfer to water or air at ambient          tify sites in your state where wind turbines for utility-scale
   conditions. Devise a theoretical power cycle that at steady state       electrical generation are feasible, considering both engineer-
   develops the maximum theoretical net work per cycle from the            ing and societal issues. Write a report including at least three
   exergy supplied by the cooling products of combustion and               references.
Vapor Power  C
Systems      H
             A
             P
             T

             8 E

             R

E N G I N E E R I N G C O N T E X T An important engineering goal is to                           chapter objective
devise systems that accomplish desired types of energy conversion. The present chapter
and the next are concerned with several types of power-generating systems, each of
which produces a net power output from a fossil fuel, nuclear, or solar input. In these
chapters, we describe some of the practical arrangements employed for power production
and illustrate how such power plants can be modeled thermodynamically. The discussion is
organized into three main areas of application: vapor power plants, gas turbine power
plants, and internal combustion engines. These power systems, together with hydroelectric
power plants, produce virtually all of the electrical and mechanical power used worldwide.
The objective of the present chapter is to study vapor power plants in which the working
fluid is alternately vaporized and condensed. Chapter 9 is concerned with gas turbines and
internal combustion engines in which the working fluid remains a gas.

8.1 Modeling Vapor Power Systems

The processes taking place in power-generating systems are sufficiently complicated that
idealizations are required to develop thermodynamic models. Such modeling is an important
initial step in engineering design. Although the study of simplified models generally leads
only to qualitative conclusions about the performance of the corresponding actual devices,
models often allow deductions about how changes in major operating parameters affect actual
performance. They also provide relatively simple settings in which to discuss the functions
and benefits of features intended to improve overall performance.

    The vast majority of electrical generating plants are variations of vapor power plants in
which water is the working fluid. The basic components of a simplified fossil-fuel vapor
power plant are shown schematically in Fig. 8.1. To facilitate thermodynamic analysis, the
overall plant can be broken down into the four major subsystems identified by the letters A
through D on the diagram. The focus of our considerations in this chapter is subsystem A,
where the important energy conversion from heat to work occurs. But first, let us briefly con-
sider the other subsystems.

    The function of subsystem B is to supply the energy required to vaporize the water passing
through the boiler. In fossil-fuel plants, this is accomplished by heat transfer to the work-
ing fluid passing through tubes and drums in the boiler from the hot gases produced by the
combustion of a fossil fuel. In nuclear plants, the origin of the energy is a controlled nu-
clear reaction taking place in an isolated reactor building. Pressurized water, a liquid metal,

                                                                                                 325
326 Chapter 8 Vapor Power Systems

      Stack

                                                     A        D                 C

                                   Combustion gases

                                     to stack                 Electric    +
                                   Boiler
                                                     Turbine  generator

                                                                          ­

                                                                                           Cooling tower

Fuel                                                          Condenser

Air                                                           Warm water

                                   B

                                                                          Pump             Cooled water

                                                              Feedwater pump Makeup water

 Figure 8.1 Components of a simple vapor power plant.

or a gas such as helium can be used to transfer energy released in the nuclear reaction to
the working fluid in specially designed heat exchangers. Solar power plants have receivers
for concentrating and collecting solar radiation to vaporize the working fluid. Regardless of
the energy source, the vapor produced in the boiler passes through a turbine, where it ex-
pands to a lower pressure. The shaft of the turbine is connected to an electric generator (sub-
system D). The vapor leaving the turbine passes through the condenser, where it condenses
on the outside of tubes carrying cooling water. The cooling water circuit comprises sub-
system C. For the plant shown, the cooling water is sent to a cooling tower, where energy
taken up in the condenser is rejected to the atmosphere. The cooling water is then recircu-
lated through the condenser.

   Concern for the environment and safety considerations govern what is allowable in the
interactions between subsystems B and C and their surroundings. One of the major difficulties
in finding a site for a vapor power plant is access to sufficient quantities of cooling water.
For this reason and to minimize thermal pollution effects, most power plants now employ
cooling towers. In addition to the question of cooling water, the safe processing and delivery
of fuel, the control of pollutant discharges, and the disposal of wastes are issues that must
be dealt with in both fossil-fueled and nuclear-fueled plants to ensure safety and operation
with an acceptable level of environmental impact. Solar power plants are generally regarded
as nonpolluting and safe but as yet are not widely used.

   Returning now to subsystem A of Fig. 8.1, observe that each unit of mass periodically
undergoes a thermodynamic cycle as the working fluid circulates through the series of four
interconnected components. Accordingly, several concepts related to thermodynamic power
cycles introduced in previous chapters are important for the present discussions. You will
recall that the conservation of energy principle requires that the net work developed by a
power cycle equals the net heat added. An important deduction from the second law is that
the thermal efficiency, which indicates the extent to which the heat added is converted to a
net work output, must be less than 100%. Previous discussions also have indicated that
                                                                           8.2 Analyzing Vapor Power Systems--Rankine Cycle 327

improved thermodynamic performance accompanies the reduction of irreversibilities. The
extent to which irreversibilities can be reduced in power-generating systems depends on
thermodynamic, economic, and other factors, however.

8.2 Analyzing Vapor Power
          Systems--Rankine Cycle

All of the fundamentals required for the thermodynamic analysis of power-generating systems         Rankine cycle
already have been introduced. They include the conservation of mass and conservation of energy
principles, the second law of thermodynamics, and thermodynamic data. These principles ap-
ply to individual plant components such as turbines, pumps, and heat exchangers as well as to
the most complicated overall power plants. The object of this section is to introduce the Rankine
cycle, which is a thermodynamic cycle that models the subsystem labeled A on Fig. 8.1. The
presentation begins by considering the thermodynamic analysis of this subsystem.

 8.2.1 Evaluating Principal Work and Heat Transfers                                                 METHODOLOGY
                                                                                                    UPDATE
The principal work and heat transfers of subsystem A are illustrated in Fig. 8.2. In subsequent
discussions, these energy transfers are taken to be positive in the directions of the arrows.       When analyzing vapor
The unavoidable stray heat transfer that takes place between the plant components and their         power cycles, we take en-
surroundings is neglected here for simplicity. Kinetic and potential energy changes are also        ergy transfers as positive
ignored. Each component is regarded as operating at steady state. Using the conservation of         in the directions of arrows
mass and conservation of energy principles together with these idealizations, we develop            on system schematics and
expressions for the energy transfers shown on Fig. 8.2 beginning at state 1 and proceeding          write the energy balance
through each component in turn.                                                                     accordingly.

TURBINE. Vapor from the boiler at state 1, having an elevated temperature and pressure,
expands through the turbine to produce work and then is discharged to the condenser at state 2
with relatively low pressure. Neglecting heat transfer with the surroundings, the mass and
energy rate balances for a control volume around the turbine reduce at steady state to give

                                                                        0                 0

           0   #0                 #     #   c  h1    h2    V12     V22       g 1 z1    z22d
              Qcv                Wt    m                        2

or

                                               #

                                               Wt    h1    h2                                (8.1)
                                                #
                                               m

           Turbine                     W t

        1

Q in                          2

Boiler                               Q out

           Pump                             Cooling water
                                        Condenser
        4
                           3                                    Figure 8.2 Principal work and heat
                                                               transfers of subsystem A.
                  W p
328 Chapter 8 Vapor Power Systems

                    where   #  denotes   the  mass      flow  rate  of  the      working       fluid,   and   #   m#  is  the  rate  at  which  work
                           m                                                                                 Wt

                    is developed per unit of mass of steam passing through the turbine. As noted above, kinetic

                    and potential energy changes are ignored.

                    CONDENSER. In the condenser there is heat transfer from the vapor to cooling water flow-

                    ing in a separate stream. The vapor condenses and the temperature of the cooling water in-

                    creases. At steady state, mass and energy rate balances for a control volume enclosing the

                    condensing side of the heat exchanger give

                                                                        #

                                                                        Qout           h2      h3                                               (8.2)
                                                                          #
                                                                         m

                    where   #    m#  is  the  rate  at  which   energy           is  transferred      by  heat  from  the  working       fluid  to  the
                           Qout

                    cooling water per unit mass of working fluid passing through the condenser. This energy

                    transfer is positive in the direction of the arrow on Fig. 8.2.

                    PUMP. The liquid condensate leaving the condenser at 3 is pumped from the condenser into

                    the higher pressure boiler. Taking a control volume around the pump and assuming no heat

                    transfer with the surroundings, mass and energy rate balances give

                                                                              #

                                                                        Wp             h4      h3                                               (8.3)
                                                                         #
                                                                        m

                    where   #   m#   is  the  rate  of  power       input        per   unit    of  mass   passing     through  the       pump.  This
                           Wp

                    energy transfer is positive in the direction of the arrow on Fig. 8.2.

                    BOILER. The working fluid completes a cycle as the liquid leaving the pump at 4, called

feedwater           the boiler feedwater, is heated to saturation and evaporated in the boiler. Taking a control

                    volume enclosing the boiler tubes and drums carrying the feedwater from state 4 to state 1,

                    mass and energy rate balances give

                                                                           #

                                                                        Qin            h1      h4                                               (8.4)
                                                                         #
                                                                        m

                    where   #   m#   is  the  rate  of  heat  transfer           from     the  energy     source  into    the  working   fluid      per
                           Qin

                    unit mass passing through the boiler.

                    PERFORMANCE PARAMETERS. The thermal efficiency gauges the extent to which the en-

                    ergy input to the working fluid passing through the boiler is converted to the net work out-

                    put. Using the quantities and expressions just introduced, the thermal efficiency of the power

                    cycle of Fig. 8.2 is

thermal efficiency                                       #  m#       #        m#          1h1      h22    1h4     h32
                                                        Wt          Wp                              h1    h4
                                                                                                                                                (8.5a)
                                              h                #    m#
                                                              Qin

                    The net work output equals the net heat input. Thus, the thermal efficiency can be expressed

                    alternatively as

                                                        h     Q# inm#  Q# outm#                    1    Q# outm#
                                                                  Q# inm#                               Q# inm#

                                                              1     1h2              h32                                                        (8.5b)
                                                                    1h1              h42
                                                                  8.2 Analyzing Vapor Power Systems--Rankine Cycle 329

Thermodynamics in the News...

Cleaner Is Better                                                     One promising tech-
                                                                  nology is fluidized bed
The United States relies heavily upon abundant coal re-           combustion, where a
serves to generate electric power, but these systems require      powdered coal-lime-
a great deal of clean-up, experts say. Awareness of the health    stone mixture churns
and environmental impacts of coal have led to increasingly-       in air to enhance the
stringent regulations on coal-burning power plants. As a          burning. The limestone
result, the search for new clean-coal technologies has            removes some sulfur
intensified.                                                      during combustion rather than waiting to remove the sulfur
                                                                  after combustion, as in conventional boilers. Nitric oxide
    According to industry sources, controlling particulate emis-  formation is also less because of the relatively low tempera-
sions and safely disposing of millions of tons of coal waste      tures of fluidized bed combustion. Another innovation is the
once were the main concerns. Sulfur dioxide removal then be-      integrated gasification combined-cycle plant, or IGCC, that
came an issue due to concern over acid rain. More recently,       promises to be cleaner and have higher thermal efficiency than
nitric oxide (NOX), mercury, and fine particle (less than 3       conventional plants. In an IGCC, coal is converted to a cleaner-
microns) emissions were recognized as especially harmful.         burning combustible gas that is used in a power plant
Strides have been made in developing more effective sulfur        combining gas and steam turbines.
dioxide scrubbers and particulate capture devices, but stricter
environmental standards demand new approaches.

Another parameter used to describe power plant performance is the back work ratio, or             back work ratio

bwr, defined as the ratio of the pump work input to the work developed by the turbine. With

Eqs. 8.1 and 8.3, the back work ratio for the power cycle of Fig. 8.2 is

bwr                          #  m#    1h4    h32                          (8.6)
                            Wp        1h1    h22

                             #  m#
                            Wt

Examples to follow illustrate that the change in specific enthalpy for the expansion of vapor
through the turbine is normally many times greater than the increase in enthalpy for the liq-
uid passing through the pump. Hence, the back work ratio is characteristically quite low for
vapor power plants.

   Provided states 1 through 4 are fixed, Eqs. 8.1 through 8.6 can be applied to determine
the thermodynamic performance of a simple vapor power plant. Since these equations
have been developed from mass and energy rate balances, they apply equally for actual
performance when irreversibilities are present and for idealized performance in the ab-
sence of such effects. It might be surmised that the irreversibilities of the various power
plant components can affect overall performance, and this is the case. Even so, it is in-
structive to consider an idealized cycle in which irreversibilities are assumed absent, for
such a cycle establishes an upper limit on the performance of the Rankine cycle. The ideal
cycle also provides a simple setting in which to study various aspects of vapor power
plant performance.

 8.2.2 Ideal Rankine Cycle

If the working fluid passes through the various components of the simple vapor power cycle        ideal Rankine cycle
without irreversibilities, frictional pressure drops would be absent from the boiler and
condenser, and the working fluid would flow through these components at constant pressure.
Also, in the absence of irreversibilities and heat transfer with the surroundings, the processes
through the turbine and pump would be isentropic. A cycle adhering to these idealizations is
the ideal Rankine cycle shown in Fig. 8.3.
330 Chapter 8 Vapor Power Systems                              1
                                         T             1
                                                    a

                             4

                                3                      2 2

                                                                                     Figure 8.3 Temperature­entropy diagram of

                                c                      b                    s the ideal Rankine cycle.

                                Referring to Fig. 8.3, we see that the working fluid undergoes the following series of in-
                             ternally reversible processes:

                             Process 1­2: Isentropic expansion of the working fluid through the turbine from saturated
                                   vapor at state 1 to the condenser pressure.

                             Process 2­3: Heat transfer from the working fluid as it flows at constant pressure through
                                   the condenser with saturated liquid at state 3.

                             Process 3­4: Isentropic compression in the pump to state 4 in the compressed liquid region.

                             Process 4­1: Heat transfer to the working fluid as it flows at constant pressure through the
                                   boiler to complete the cycle.

                             The ideal Rankine cycle also includes the possibility of superheating the vapor, as in cycle
                             1­2­3­4­1. The importance of superheating is discussed in Sec. 8.3.

                             Since the ideal Rankine cycle consists of internally reversible processes, areas under the

                             process lines of Fig. 8.3 can be interpreted as heat transfers per unit of mass flowing. Ap-

                             plying Eq. 6.51, area 1­b­c­4­a­1 represents the heat transfer to the working fluid passing

                             through the boiler and area 2­b­c­3­2, is the heat transfer from the working fluid passing

                             through the condenser, each per unit of mass flowing. The enclosed area 1­2­3­4­a­1 can

                             be interpreted as the net heat input or, equivalently, the net work output, each per unit of

                             mass flowing.

                             Because the pump is idealized as operating without irreversibilities, Eq. 6.53b can be in-

                             voked as an alternative to Eq. 8.3 for evaluating the pump work. That is

                                                                         #

                                                                      a Wp  b  int       4              (8.7a)
                                                                         #     rev
                                                                        m                 v dp

                                                                                         3

METHODOLOGY                  where the minus sign has been dropped for consistency with the positive value for pump
UPDATE                       work in Eq. 8.3. The subscript "int rev" has been retained as a reminder that this expression
                             is restricted to an internally reversible process through the pump. No such designation is re-
For cycles, we modify the    quired by Eq. 8.3, however, because it expresses the conservation of mass and energy prin-
problem-solving methodol-    ciples and thus is not restricted to processes that are internally reversible.
ogy: The Analysis begins
with a systematic evalua-       Evaluation of the integral of Eq. 8.7a requires a relationship between the specific volume
tion of required property    and pressure for the process. Because the specific volume of the liquid normally varies only
data at each numbered        slightly as the liquid flows from the inlet to the exit of the pump, a plausible approximation
state. This reinforces what  to the value of the integral can be had by taking the specific volume at the pump inlet, v3,
we know about the com-       as constant for the process. Then
ponents, since given infor-
mation and assumptions                                               #
are required to fix the
states.                                                           a  Wp  b  int     v31  p4    p32      (8.7b)
                                                                      #     rev
                                                                     m

                             The next example illustrates the analysis of an ideal Rankine cycle.
                                                                                    8.2 Analyzing Vapor Power Systems--Rankine Cycle 331

E X A M P L E 8 . 1 Ideal Rankine Cycle

Steam is the working fluid in an ideal Rankine cycle. Saturated vapor enters the turbine at 8.0 MPa and saturated liquid exits
the condenser at a pressure of 0.008 MPa. The net power output of the cycle is 100 MW. Determine for the cycle # (a) the
thermal efficiency, (b) the back work ratio, (c) the mass flow rate of the steam, in kg/h, #(d) the rate of heat transfer, Qin, into
the working fluid as it passes through the boiler, in MW, (e) the rate of heat transfer, Qout, from the condensing steam as it
passes through the condenser, in MW, (f) the mass flow rate of the condenser cooling water, in kg/ h, if cooling water enters
the condenser at 15C and exits at 35C.

SOLUTION

Known: An ideal Rankine cycle operates with steam as the working fluid. The boiler and condenser pressures are specified,
and the net power output is given.

Find: Determine the thermal efficiency, the back work ratio, the mass flow rate of the steam, in kg/h, the rate of heat transfer
to the working fluid as it passes through the boiler, in MW, the rate of heat transfer from the condensing steam as it passes
through the condenser, in MW, the mass flow rate of the condenser cooling water, which enters at 15C and exits at 35C.

Schematic and Given Data:

        Q in

                 p1 =                         W t

Boiler           8.0 MPa

                              Turbine                  T
                 1

                 Saturated                                               8.0 MPa 1

                 vapor                 2

                 Condenser

                                             Q out

                                              Cooling     4 0.008 MPa
                                              water
                 Pump                                     3                      2

              4                                                                     s
                                                                                             Figure E8.1
                            3

                 W p              Saturated
                            liquid at 0.008 MPa

Assumptions:

1. Each component of the cycle is analyzed as a control volume at steady state. The control volumes are shown on the
accompanying sketch by dashed lines.
2. All processes of the working fluid are internally reversible.
3. The turbine and pump operate adiabatically.
4. Kinetic and potential energy effects are negligible.
5. Saturated vapor enters the turbine. Condensate exits the condenser as saturated liquid.

     Analysis: To begin the analysis, we fix each of the principal states located on the accompanying schematic and T­s diagrams.

 Starting at the inlet to the turbine, the pressure is 8.0 MPa and the steam is a saturated vapor, so from Table A-3, h1  2758.0

     kJ/kg and s1  5.7432 kJ/kg # K.
         State 2 is fixed by p2  0.008 MPa and the fact that the specific entropy is constant for the adiabatic, internally reversible ex-

     pansion through the turbine. Using saturated liquid and saturated vapor data from Table A-3, we find that the quality at state 2 is

                            x2            s2     sf    5.7432  0.5926    0.6745
                                          sg     sf          7.6361
332 Chapter 8 Vapor Power Systems

The enthalpy is then

                                      h2  hf  x2hfg  173.88  10.674522403.1
                                          1794.8 kJ/kg

    State 3 is saturated liquid at 0.008 MPa, so h3  173.88 kJ/kg.
    State 4 is fixed by the boiler pressure p4 and the specific entropy s4  s3. The specific enthalpy h4 can be found by inter-

polation in the compressed liquid tables. However, because compressed liquid data are relatively sparse, it is more convenient

to solve Eq. 8.3 for h4, using Eq. 8.7b to approximate the pump work. With this approach

                                            h4       h3      #    m#       h3     v3 1 p4      p32
                                                            Wp

By inserting property values from Table A-3

h4  173.88 kJ/kg                      11.0084  103 m3/kg2 18.0  0.0082 MPa ` 106 N/m2 `                    `     1 kJ  m  `
                                                                                             1 MPa            103 N #

                       173.88  8.06  181.94 kJ/kg

(a) The net power developed by the cycle is

                                                            #              ##

                                                           Wcycle  Wt  Wp

Mass and energy rate balances for control volumes around the turbine and pump give, respectively

                                         #                                         #

                                         Wt        h1      h2         and         Wp       h4       h3
                                          #                                        #
                                         m                                        m

         #
where m is the mass flow rate of the steam. The rate of heat transfer to the working fluid as it passes through the boiler is

determined using mass and energy rate balances as

                                                               #

                                                               Qin      h1     h4
                                                                #
                                                               m

The thermal efficiency is then

                                         ##

                                      Wt  Wp              1h1         h22    1h4      h32
                                          #                            h1    h4
                                 h       Qin

                                      3 12758.0  1794.82  1181.94  173.882 4 kJ/kg

                                                          12758.0  181.942 kJ/kg

                                     0.371 137.1%2

     (b) The back work ratio is                 #

                                    bwr      Wp        h4         h3       1181.94      173.882     kJ/kg
                                              #
                                             Wt h1  h2 12758.0  1794.82 kJ/kg

                                          8.06  8.37  103 10.84% 2
                                            963.2

(c) The mass flow rate of the steam can be obtained from the expression for the net power given in part (a). Thus

                                                                  #

                                          #          1h1      Wcycle           h32
                                         m                  h22  1h4

                                                     1100 MW2103 kW/MW 3600 s/h

                                                            1963.2  8.062 kJ/kg

                                              3.77  105 kg/h
                                                                           8.2 Analyzing Vapor Power Systems--Rankine Cycle 333

                                    #
(d) With the expression for Qin from part (a) and previously determined specific enthalpy values

                  #      #  1  h1                       h42
                 Qin    m

                           13.77  105 kg/ h2 12758.0  181.942 kJ/kg

                                                        3600 s/h 103 kW/MW

                       269.77 MW

(e) Mass and energy rate balances applied to a control volume enclosing the steam side of the condenser give

               #            #  1  h2                    h32
              Qout         m

                           13.77  105 kg/h2 11794.8  173.882 kJ/kg

                                                           3600 s/h 103 kW/MW

                       169.75 MW

   #  #

 Note that the ratio# of Qout to Qin is 0.629 (62.9%).
Alternatively, Qout can be determined from an energy rate balance on the overall vapor power plant. At steady state, the

net power developed equals the net rate of heat transfer to the plant

                                                        #          ##

                                                        Wcycle  Qin  Qout

Rearranging this expression and inserting values

         #       ##

         Qout  Qin  Wcycle  269.77 MW  100 MW  169.77 MW

The slight difference from the above value is due to round-off.

(f) Taking a control volume around the condenser, the mass and energy rate balances give at steady state

              0        #0          #0                        m# cw1hcw,in       hcw,out2     #  1  h2    h32
                      Qcv         Wcv                                                       m

#                                                                            #
where mcw is the mass flow rate of the cooling water. Solving for mcw

                                                         #      #  1  h2        h32
                                                        mcw    m

                                                               1hcw,out  hcw,in2

The numerator in this expression is evaluated in part (e). For the cooling water, h  hf ( T ), so with saturated liquid enthalpy
values from Table A-2 at the entering and exiting temperatures of the cooling water

          #      1169.75 MW2103                              kW/MW 3600              s/h    7.3          106  kg/h
         mcw             1146.68                             62.992 kJ/kg

 Note that a slightly revised problem-solving methodology is used in this example problem: We begin with a systematic

    evaluation of the specific enthalpy at each numbered state.

 Note that the back work ratio is relatively low for the Rankine cycle. In the present case, the work required to operate the

    pump is less than 1% of the turbine output.

 In this example, 62.9% of the energy added to the working fluid by heat transfer is subsequently discharged to the cool-

    ing water. Although considerable energy is carried away by the cooling water, its exergy is small because the water exits

    at a temperature only a few degrees greater than that of the surroundings. See Sec. 8.6 for further discussion.

 8.2.3 Effects of Boiler and Condenser Pressures
                on the Rankine Cycle

In discussing Fig. 5.9 (Sec. 5.5.1), we observed that the thermal efficiency of power cycles
tends to increase as the average temperature at which energy is added by heat transfer increases
and/or the average temperature at which energy is rejected decreases. (For elaboration, see
box.) Let us apply this idea to study the effects on performance of the ideal Rankine cycle
of changes in the boiler and condenser pressures. Although these findings are obtained with
reference to the ideal Rankine cycle, they also hold qualitatively for actual vapor power plants.
334 Chapter 8 Vapor Power Systems

CO N S I D E R I N G T H E E F F E C T O F T E M P E R AT U R E O N
THERMAL EFFICIENCY

Since the ideal Rankine cycle consists entirely of internally reversible processes, an

expression for thermal efficiency can be obtained in terms of average temperatures dur-

ing the heat interaction processes. Let us begin the development of this expression by

recalling that areas under the process lines of Fig. 8.3 can be interpreted as the heat

transfer per unit of mass flowing through the respective components. For example, the

total area 1­b­c­4­a­1 represents the heat transfer into the working fluid per unit of

mass passing through the boiler. In symbols,

                                         #

                                       a Qin  b  int         1
                                          #      rev
                                         m                    T ds  area 1­b­c­4­a­1

                                                            4

The integral can be written in terms of an average temperature of heat addition, Tin, as
follows:

                                                         #

                                                      a  Qin  b  int    Tin1s1      s42
                                                          #      rev
                                                         m

where the overbar denotes average. Similarly, area 2­b­c­3­2 represents the heat trans-

fer from the condensing steam per unit of mass passing through the condenser

                                      #

                                   a  Qout  b  int       Tout1s2        s32       area  2­b­c­3­2
                                        #      rev
                                       m

                                                       Tout1s1  s42

where Tout denotes the temperature on the steam side of the condenser of the ideal
Rankine cycle pictured in Fig. 8.3. The thermal efficiency of the ideal Rankine cycle

can be expressed in terms of these heat transfers as

                                          hideal         1         #    m# 2int     1     Tout     (8.8)
                                                                 1Qout       rev          Tin

                                                                   #    m# 2int
                                                                 1Qin       rev

By the study of Eq. 8.8, we conclude that the thermal efficiency of the ideal cycle tends

to increase as the average temperature at which energy is added by heat transfer in-

creases and/or the temperature at which energy is rejected decreases. With similar rea-

soning, these conclusions can be shown to apply to the other ideal cycles considered

in this chapter and the next.

   Figure 8.4a shows two ideal cycles having the same condenser pressure but different
boiler pressures. By inspection, the average temperature of heat addition is seen to be
greater for the higher-pressure cycle 1­2­3­4­1 than for cycle 1­2­3­4­1. It follows
that increasing the boiler pressure of the ideal Rankine cycle tends to increase the thermal
efficiency.

   Figure 8.4b shows two cycles with the same boiler pressure but two different condenser
pressures. One condenser operates at atmospheric pressure and the other at less than at-
mospheric pressure. The temperature of heat rejection for cycle 1­2­3­4­1 condensing at
atmospheric pressure is 100C (212F). The temperature of heat rejection for the lower-
pressure cycle 1­2­3­4­1 is correspondingly lower, so this cycle has the greater thermal
efficiency. It follows that decreasing the condenser pressure tends to increase the thermal
efficiency.
                                                                 8.2 Analyzing Vapor Power Systems--Rankine Cycle 335

T                               1                                                T            Fixed boiler pressure
                                    1
          4                                  Increased
           4                 2 2             boiler pressure

             3                                                                             1                  Decreased

                                                                                        4                     condenser pressure

                                             Fixed               100° C             4 3                 patm
                                             condenser pressure  (212° F)           3      2

                                                                                           2       p < patm

                                                                                                                 Ambient temperature

                                             s                                                                s

                                (a)                                                           (b)

 Figure 8.4 Effects of varying operating pressures on the ideal Rankine cycle. (a) Effect of
boiler pressure. (b) Effect of condenser pressure.

   The lowest feasible condenser pressure is the saturation pressure corresponding to the am-
bient temperature, for this is the lowest possible temperature for heat rejection to the sur-
roundings. The goal of maintaining the lowest practical turbine exhaust (condenser) pressure
is a primary reason for including the condenser in a power plant. Liquid water at atmospheric
pressure could be drawn into the boiler by a pump, and steam could be discharged directly
to the atmosphere at the turbine exit. However, by including a condenser in which the steam
side is operated at a pressure below atmospheric, the turbine has a lower-pressure region in
which to discharge, resulting in a significant increase in net work and thermal efficiency. The
addition of a condenser also allows the working fluid to flow in a closed loop. This arrange-
ment permits continual circulation of the working fluid, so purified water that is less corro-
sive than tap water can be used economically.

COMPARISON WITH CARNOT CYCLE. Referring to Fig. 8.5, the ideal Rankine cycle
1­2­3­4­4­1 has a lower thermal efficiency than the Carnot cycle 1­2­3­4­1 having the
same maximum temperature TH and minimum temperature TC because the average temper-
ature between 4 and 4 is less than TH. Despite the greater thermal efficiency of the Carnot

                                        Cooling curve for the
                                        products of combustion

T

TH              p  constant  4            1

                4

TC                 3 3                 2

                                                        Figure 8.5 Illustration used to compare
                                                s the ideal Rankine cycle with the Carnot cycle.
336 Chapter 8 Vapor Power Systems

                                cycle, it has two shortcomings as a model for the simple vapor power cycle. First, the heat
                                passing to the working fluid of a vapor power plant is usually obtained from hot products of
                                combustion cooling at approximately constant pressure. To exploit fully the energy released
                                on combustion, the hot products should be cooled as much as possible. The first portion of
                                the heating process of the Rankine cycle shown in Fig. 8.5, Process 4­4, is achieved by
                                cooling the combustion products below the maximum temperature TH. With the Carnot cycle,
                                however, the combustion products would be cooled at the most to TH. Thus, a smaller por-
                                tion of the energy released on combustion would be used. The second shortcoming of the
                                Carnot vapor power cycle involves the pumping process. Note that the state 3 of Fig. 8.5 is
                                a two-phase liquid­vapor mixture. Significant practical problems are encountered in devel-
                                oping pumps that handle two-phase mixtures, as would be required by Carnot cycle
                                1­2­3­ 4­1. It is far easier to condense the vapor completely and handle only liquid in the
                                pump, as is done in the Rankine cycle. Pumping from 3 to 4 and constant-pressure heating
                                without work from 4 to 4 are processes that can be closely achieved in practice.

 8.2.4 Principal Irreversibilities and Losses

Irreversibilities and losses are associated with each of the four subsystems shown in Fig. 8.1.
Some of these effects have a more pronounced influence on performance than others. Let us
consider the irreversibilities and losses associated with the Rankine cycle.

TURBINE. The principal irreversibility experienced by the working fluid is associated with
the expansion through the turbine. Heat transfer from the turbine to the surroundings repre-
sents a loss, but since it is usually of secondary importance, this loss is ignored in subse-
quent discussions. As illustrated by Process 1­2 of Fig. 8.6, an actual adiabatic expansion
through the turbine is accompanied by an increase in entropy. The work developed per unit
of mass in this process is less than for the corresponding isentropic expansion 1­2s. The isen-
tropic turbine efficiency ht introduced in Sec. 6.8 allows the effect of irreversibilities within
the turbine to be accounted for in terms of the actual and isentropic work amounts. Desig-
nating the states as in Fig. 8.6, the isentropic turbine efficiency is

                  1   #  m# 2     h1  h2   (8.9)
                     Wt           h1  h2s
            ht      #
                  1Wt  m# 2
                             s

where the numerator is the actual work developed per unit of mass passing through the tur-
bine and the denominator is the work for an isentropic expansion from the turbine inlet state

T

         1

      4
   4s

   3     2s 2

                             Figure 8.6 Temperature­entropy diagram
                            showing the effects of turbine and pump
                       s irreversibilities.
                              8.2 Analyzing Vapor Power Systems--Rankine Cycle 337

to the turbine exhaust pressure. Irreversibilities within the turbine significantly reduce the net
power output of the plant.

PUMP. The work input to the pump required to overcome frictional effects also reduces
the net power output of the plant. In the absence of heat transfer to the surroundings, there
would be an increase in entropy across the pump. Process 3­ 4 of Fig. 8.6 illustrates the
actual pumping process. The work input for this process is greater than for the corre-
sponding isentropic process 3­ 4s. The isentropic pump efficiency p introduced in Sec. 6.8
allows the effect of irreversibilities within the pump to be accounted for in terms of the
actual and isentropic work amounts. Designating the states as in Fig. 8.6, the isentropic
pump efficiency is

        #  m# 2s     h4s  h3  (8.10)
      1Wp            h4  h3

hp    1   #  m# 2
         Wp

In this expression, the pump work for the isentropic process appears in the numerator. The
actual pump work, being the larger quantity, is the denominator. Because the pump work is
so much less than the turbine work, irreversibilities in the pump have a much smaller impact
on the net work of the cycle than do irreversibilities in the turbine.

OTHER NONIDEALITIES. The turbine and pump irreversibilities mentioned above are
internal irreversibilities experienced by the working fluid as it flows around the closed loop
of the Rankine cycle. The most significant sources of irreversibility for a fossil-fueled vapor
power plant, however, are associated with the combustion of the fuel and the subsequent heat
transfer from the hot combustion products to the cycle working fluid. These effects occur in
the surroundings of the subsystem labeled A on Fig. 8.1 and thus are external irreversibilities
for the Rankine cycle. These irreversibilities are considered further in Sec. 8.6 and Chap. 13
using the exergy concept.

   Another effect that occurs in the surroundings is the energy discharge to the cooling water
as the working fluid condenses. Although considerable energy is carried away by the cool-
ing water, its utility is extremely limited. For condensers in which steam condenses near the
ambient temperature, the cooling water experiences a temperature rise of only a few degrees
over the temperature of the surroundings in passing through the condenser and thus has lim-
ited usefulness. Accordingly, the significance of this loss is far less than suggested by the
magnitude of the energy transferred to the cooling water. The utility of condenser cooling
water is considered further in Sec. 8.6 using the exergy concept.

   In addition to the foregoing, there are several other sources of nonideality. For example,
stray heat transfers from the outside surfaces of the plant components have detrimental ef-
fects on performance, since such losses reduce the extent of conversion from heat input to
work output. Frictional effects resulting in pressure drops are sources of internal irreversibility
as the working fluid flows through the boiler, condenser, and piping connecting the various
components. Detailed thermodynamic analyses would account for these effects. For sim-
plicity, however, they are ignored in the subsequent discussions. Thus, Fig. 8.6 shows no
pressure drops for flow through the boiler and condenser or between plant components. An-
other effect on performance is suggested by the placement of state 3 on Fig. 8.6. At this state,
the temperature of the working fluid exiting the condenser would be lower than the satura-
tion temperature corresponding to the condenser pressure. This is disadvantageous because
a greater heat transfer would be required in the boiler to bring the water to saturation.

   In the next example, the ideal Rankine cycle of Example 8.1 is modified to include the
effects of irreversibilities in the turbine and pump.
338 Chapter 8 Vapor Power Systems

E X A M P L E 8 . 2 Rankine Cycle with Irreversibilities

Reconsider the vapor power cycle of Example 8.1, but include in the analysis that the turbine and the pump each have an isen-

tropic efficiency of 85%. Determine for the modified cycle (a) the#thermal efficiency, (b) the mass flow rate of steam, in kg/h,
for a net power output of 100 MW# , (c) the rate of heat transfer Qin into the working fluid as it passes through the boiler, in
MW, (d) the rate of heat transfer Qout from the condensing steam as it passes through the condenser, in MW, (e) the mass flow
rate of the condenser cooling water, in kg/h, if cooling water enters the condenser at 15C and exits as 35C. Discuss the

effects on the vapor cycle of irreversibilities within the turbine and pump.

SOLUTION

Known: A vapor power cycle operates with steam as the working fluid. The turbine and pump both have efficiencies of 85%.

Find: Determine the thermal efficiency, the mass flow rate, in kg/h, the rate of heat transfer to the working fluid as it passes
through the boiler, in MW, the heat transfer rate from the condensing steam as it passes through the condenser, in MW, and
the mass flow rate of the condenser cooling water, in kg/h. Discuss.

Schematic and Given Data:

T                                                                     Assumptions:

                  8.0 MPa 1                                           1. Each component of the cycle is analyzed as a control volume at steady
                                                                      state.
       4
                                                                      2. The working fluid passes through the boiler and condenser at constant
   4s                                                                 pressure. Saturated vapor enters the turbine. The condensate is saturated
                                                                      at the condenser exit.
   3      0.008 MPa
                                                                      3. The turbine and pump each operate adiabatically with an efficiency
                       2s 2                                           of 85%.

                                                                      4. Kinetic and potential energy effects are negligible.
                                                               s

                                                                       Figure E8.2

Analysis: Owing to the presence of irreversibilities during the expansion of the steam through the turbine, there is an increase

in specific entropy from turbine inlet to exit, as shown on the accompanying T­s diagram. Similarly, there is an increase in

specific entropy from pump inlet to exit. Let us begin the analysis by fixing each of the principal states. State 1 is the same

as in Example 8.1, so h1  2758.0 kJ/kg and s1  5.7432 kJ/kg # K.
    The specific enthalpy at the turbine exit, state 2, can be determined using the turbine efficiency

                                                               ht        #  m#         h1  h2
                                                                        Wt             h1  h2s
                                                                         #
                                                                     1  Wt  m# 2  s

where h2s is the specific enthalpy at state 2s on the accompanying T­s diagram. From the solution to Example 8.1, h2s 
1794.8 kJ/ kg. Solving for h2 and inserting known values

                             h2  h1  ht1h1  h2s2
                                 2758  0.8512758  1794.82  1939.3 kJ/kg

   State 3 is the same as in Example 8.1, so h3  173.88 kJ/kg.

    To determine  the  osbpteacinifiWc# penmt#halphy4  at the  pump exit, state 4,   reduce mass and energy rate balances  for  a  control  volume
around the pump   to                                    h3.    On rearrangement,     the specific enthalpy at state 4 is

                                                                   h4  h3  W# pm#

To determine h4 from this expression requires the pump work, which can be evaluated using the pump efficiency hp, as follows.
By definition

                                                                              #       m# 2  s
                                                                            1Wp

                                                                     hp     1      #  m# 2
                                                                                  Wp
                                                                                         8.2 Analyzing Vapor Power Systems--Rankine Cycle 339

The  term  1W# pm# 2s  can  be  evaluated  using    Eq.    8.7b.      Then   solving         for   #   m#   results  in
                                                                                                  Wp

                                                                        #

                                                                      Wp          v31 p4          p32
                                                                       #
                                                                        m
                                                                                         hp

The numerator of this expression was determined in the solution to Example 8.1. Accordingly,

                                                              #

                                                           Wp           8.06 kJ/kg           9.48      kJ/kg
                                                            #
                                                           m               0.85

The specific enthalpy at the pump exit is then

                                           h4       h3      #       m#       173.88          9.48          183.36    kJ/kg
                                                           Wp

(a) The net power developed by the cycle is

                                                #              #         #        m# 3 1h1        h22       1h4    h32 4
                                               Wcycle         Wt        Wp

The rate of heat transfer to the working fluid as it passes through the boiler is

                                                                       #           #  1  h1    h42
                                                                      Qin         m

Thus, the thermal efficiency is

                                                                        1h1       h22        1h4       h32
                                                                                   h1        h4
                                                                 h

Inserting values

                                             h        12758  1939.32  9.48                         0.314 131.4%2

                                                              2758  183.36

(b) With the net power expression of part (a), the mass flow rate of the steam is

                                                           #

                                  #          1h1          Wcycle             h32
                                 m                      h22  1h4

                                             1100 MW23600 s/h 103 kW/MW                                 4.449  105 kg/h

                                                        1818.7  9.482 kJ/kg

                                   #
(c) With the expression for Qin from part (a) and previously determined specific enthalpy values

                                  #         #  1  h1       h42
                                 Qin       m

                                             14.449  105 kg/h2 12758  183.362 kJ/kg                               318.2 MW

                                                           3600 s/h 103 kW/MW

(d) The rate of heat transfer from the condensing steam to the cooling water is

                                 #          #  1h2      h32
                                Qout       m

                                           14.449  105 kg/h2 11939.3  173.882 kJ/kg                                 218.2 MW

                                                           3600 s/h 103 kW/MW

(e) The mass flow rate of the cooling water can be determined from

                                  #                #  1h2        h32
                                 mcw              m

                                             1hcw,out  hcw,in2

                                             1218.2 MW2103 kW/MW 3600 s/h                                 9.39  106 kg/h

                                                        1146.68  62.992 kJ/kg
340 Chapter 8 Vapor Power Systems

        The effect of irreversibilities within the turbine and pump can be gauged by comparing the present values with their coun-
    terparts in Example 8.1. In this example, the turbine work per unit of mass is less and the pump work per unit of mass is
    greater than in Example 8.1. The thermal efficiency in the present case is less than in the ideal case of the previous example.
    For a fixed net power output (100 MW), the smaller net work output per unit mass in the present case dictates a greater mass
    flow rate of steam. The magnitude of the heat transfer to the cooling water is greater in this example than in Example 8.1;
    consequently, a greater mass flow rate of cooling water would be required.

superheat  8.3 Improving Performance--Superheat
reheat              and Reheat

           The representations of the vapor power cycle considered thus far do not depict actual vapor
           power plants faithfully, for various modifications are usually incorporated to improve over-
           all performance. In this section we consider two cycle modifications known as superheat and
           reheat. Both features are normally incorporated into vapor power plants.

               Let us begin the discussion by noting that an increase in the boiler pressure or a decrease
           in the condenser pressure may result in a reduction of the steam quality at the exit of the tur-
           bine. This can be seen by comparing states 2 and 2 of Figs. 8.4a and 8.4b to the corre-
           sponding state 2 of each diagram. If the quality of the mixture passing through the turbine
           becomes too low, the impact of liquid droplets in the flowing liquid­vapor mixture can erode
           the turbine blades, causing a decrease in the turbine efficiency and an increased need for
           maintenance. Accordingly, common practice is to maintain at least 90% quality (x  0.9) at
           the turbine exit. The cycle modifications known as superheat and reheat permit advantageous
           operating pressures in the boiler and condenser and yet offset the problem of low quality of
           the turbine exhaust.

           SUPERHEAT. First, let us consider superheat. As we are not limited to having saturated
           vapor at the turbine inlet, further energy can be added by heat transfer to the steam, bring-
           ing it to a superheated vapor condition at the turbine inlet. This is accomplished in a sepa-
           rate heat exchanger called a superheater. The combination of boiler and superheater is re-
           ferred to as a steam generator. Figure 8.3 shows an ideal Rankine cycle with superheated
           vapor at the turbine inlet: cycle 1­2­3­4­1. The cycle with superheat has a higher aver-
           age temperature of heat addition than the cycle without superheating (cycle 1­2­3­4­1), so
           the thermal efficiency is higher. Moreover, the quality at turbine exhaust state 2 is greater
           than at state 2, which would be the turbine exhaust state without superheating. Accordingly,
           superheating also tends to alleviate the problem of low steam quality at the turbine exhaust.
           With sufficient superheating, the turbine exhaust state may even fall in the superheated vapor
           region.

           REHEAT. A further modification normally employed in vapor power plants is reheat. With
           reheat, a power plant can take advantage of the increased efficiency that results with higher
           boiler pressures and yet avoid low-quality steam at the turbine exhaust. In the ideal reheat
           cycle shown in Fig. 8.7, the steam does not expand to the condenser pressure in a single
           stage. The steam expands through a first-stage turbine (Process 1­2) to some pressure be-
           tween the steam generator and condenser pressures. The steam is then reheated in the steam
           generator (Process 2­3). Ideally, there would be no pressure drop as the steam is reheated.
           After reheating, the steam expands in a second-stage turbine to the condenser pressure
           (Process 3­4). The principal advantage of reheat is to increase the quality of the steam at the
           turbine exhaust. This can be seen from the T­s diagram of Fig. 8.7 by comparing state 4 with
                                                                    8.3 Improving Performance--Superheat and Reheat 341

      Reheat section

                      3                    Low-pressure

                                                turbine
                      2

Q in                                                     W t

                      1                                                1
                                                                            T1
                      High-                                   T               3 T3

                      pressure          4                                2

                      turbine                                          4 4
                                                                                         s
           Steam
           generator

                             Condenser     Q out                 6

      6               Pump                                          5

      W p                5

 Figure 8.7 Ideal reheat cycle.

state 4, the turbine exhaust state without reheating. When computing the thermal efficiency
of a reheat cycle, it is necessary to account for the work output of both turbine stages as well
as the total heat addition occurring in the vaporization/superheating and reheating processes.
This calculation is illustrated in Example 8.3.

SUPERCRITICAL CYCLE. The temperature of the steam entering the turbine is restricted by           T        1
metallurgical limitations imposed by the materials used to fabricate the superheater, reheater,
and turbine. High pressure in the steam generator also requires piping that can withstand                        3
great stresses at elevated temperatures. Although these factors limit the gains that can be re-
alized through superheating and reheating, improved materials and methods of fabrication                   2
have permitted significant increases over the years in the maximum allowed cycle tempera-
tures and steam generator pressures, with corresponding increases in thermal efficiency. This        6
has progressed to the extent that vapor power plants can be designed to operate with steam
generator pressures exceeding the critical pressure of water 22.1 MPa, and turbine inlet tem-           5     4
peratures exceeding 600C. Figure 8.8 shows an ideal reheat cycle with a supercritical steam
generator pressure. Observe that no phase change occurs during the heat addition process                                                s
from 6 to 1.
                                                                                                   Figure 8.8 Super-
   In the next example, the ideal Rankine cycle of Example 8.1 is modified to include             critical ideal reheat cycle.
superheat and reheat.

      E X A M P L E 8 . 3 Ideal Reheat Cycle

      Steam is the working fluid in an ideal Rankine cycle with superheat and reheat. Steam enters the first-stage turbine at 8.0 MPa,
      480C, and expands to 0.7 MPa. It is then reheated to 440C before entering the second-stage turbine, where it expands to the
      condenser pressure of 0.008 MPa. The net power output is 100 MW# . Determine (a) the thermal efficiency of the cycle,
      (b) the mass flow rate of steam, in kg/h, (c) the rate of heat transfer Qout from the condensing steam as it passes through the
      condenser, in MW. Discuss the effects of reheat on the vapor power cycle.
342 Chapter 8 Vapor Power Systems

    SOLUTION
    Known: An ideal reheat cycle operates with steam as the working fluid. Operating pressures and temperatures are specified,
    and the net power output is given.
    Find: Determine the thermal efficiency, the mass flow rate of the steam, in kg/h, and the heat transfer rate from the con-
    densing steam as it passes through the condenser, in MW. Discuss.
    Schematic and Given Data:

              T1 = 480°C       Turbine 1
              p1 = 8.0 MPa               Turbine 2

 Steam                   1
generator

              p2 = 0.7 MPa                                     T                                 1
                                                                                                       T1
                               2                                                                             3 T3
                                                          4
                                                                                   8.0 MPa
                               3 T3 = 440°C
                                                                                   0.7 MPa 2
                                   Condenser

              pcond = 0.008 MPa

                                                                             6
                               Pump

           6                                                                    5  0.008 MPa  4

                               5 Saturated liquid                                                                  s
                                                                                                                            Figure E8.3

Assumptions:

1. Each component in the cycle is analyzed as a control volume at steady state. The control volumes are shown on the ac-
companying sketch by dashed lines.
2. All processes of the working fluid are internally reversible.
3. The turbine and pump operate adiabatically.
4. Condensate exits the condenser as saturated liquid.
5. Kinetic and potential energy effects are negligible.

Analysis: To begin, we fix each of the principal states. Starting at the inlet to the first turbine stage, the pressure is 8.0 MPa
and the temperature is 480C, so the steam is a superheated vapor. From Table A-4, h1  3348.4 kJ/kg and s1 
6.6586 kJ/kg # K.

    State 2 is fixed by p2  0.7 MPa and s2  s1 for the isentropic expansion through the first-stage turbine. Using saturated
liquid and saturated vapor data from Table A-3, the quality at state 2 is

                               x2    s2            sf          6.6586  1.9922        0.9895
                                     sg            sf          6.708  1.9922

The specific enthalpy is then

                               h2  hf  x2hfg
                                   697.22  10.989522066.3  2741.8 kJ/kg

    State 3 is superheated vapor with p3  0.7 MPa and T3  440C, so from Table A-4, h3  3353.3 kJ/kg and s3  7.7571
kJ/kg # K.
                                                                              8.3 Improving Performance--Superheat and Reheat 343

    To fix state 4, use p4  0.008 MPa and s4  s3 for the isentropic expansion through the second-stage turbine. With data
from Table A-3, the quality at state 4 is

                                      x4       s4          sf     7.7571         0.5926       0.9382
                                               sg          sf     8.2287         0.5926

The specific enthalpy is

                                     h4  173.88  10.938222403.1  2428.5 kJ/kg

    State 5 is saturated liquid at 0.008 MPa, so h5  173.88 kJ/kg. Finally, the state at the pump exit is the same as in
Example 8.1, so h6  181.94 kJ/kg.

(a) The net power developed by the cycle is

                                                        #              ###

                                                       Wcycle  Wt1  Wt2  Wp

Mass and energy rate balances for the two turbine stages and the pump reduce to give, respectively

                                               Turbine 1:                W# t1m#  h1  h2
                                               Turbine 2:                W# t2m#  h3  h4
                                               Pump:                     W# pm#  h6  h5

         #
where m is the mass flow rate of the steam.

    The total rate of heat transfer to the working fluid as it passes through the boiler­superheater and reheater is

                                                    #

                                                   Qin            1h1    h62     1h3     h22
                                                    #
                                                   m

Using these expressions, the thermal efficiency is

                               1h1    h22      1h3         h42         1h6    h52
                                      1h1      h62         1h3         h22
                          h

                               13348.4  2741.82  13353.3  2428.52  1181.94  173.882

                                            13348.4  181.942  13353.3  2741.82

                               606.6  924.8  8.06                      1523.3 kJ/kg       0.403  140.3 % 2
                                   3166.5  611.5                        3778 kJ/kg

(b) The mass flow rate of the steam can be obtained with the expression for net power given in part (a).

                                                               #

                                #    1h1    h22           Wcycle            1h6    h52
                               m                        1h3  h42

                                      1100 MW23600 s/h 103 kW/MW
                                    1606.6  924.8  8.062 kJ/kg  2.363  105 kg/h

(c) The rate of heat transfer from the condensing steam to the cooling water is

                              #        #  1h4      h52
                             Qout     m

                                      2.363  105 kg/h 12428.5  173.882 kJ/kg                      148 MW

                                                       3600 s/h 103 kW/MW

    To see the effects of reheat, we compare the present values with their counterparts in Example 8.1. With superheat
and reheat, the thermal efficiency is increased over that of the cycle of Example 8.1. For a specified net power output
(100 MW), a larger thermal efficiency means that a smaller mass flow rate of steam is required. Moreover, with a greater
thermal efficiency the rate of heat transfer to the cooling water is also less, resulting in a reduced demand for cooling
water. With reheating, the steam quality at the turbine exhaust is substantially increased over the value for the cycle of
Example 8.1.
344 Chapter 8 Vapor Power Systems

                                    The following example illustrates the effect of turbine irreversibilities on the ideal reheat
                                cycle of Example 8.3.

  E X A M P L E 8 . 4 Reheat Cycle with Turbine Irreversibility

  Reconsider the reheat cycle of Example 8.3, but include in the analysis that each turbine stage has the same isentropic effi-
  ciency. (a) If t  85%, determine the thermal efficiency. (b) Plot the thermal efficiency versus turbine stage efficiency rang-
  ing from 85 to 100%.

  SOLUTION

  Known: A reheat cycle operates with steam as the working fluid. Operating pressures and temperatures are specified. Each
  turbine stage has the same isentropic efficiency.
  Find: If t  85%, determine the thermal efficiency. Also, plot the thermal efficiency versus turbine stage efficiency rang-
  ing from 85 to 100%.

  Schematic and Given Data:

  T                         1                          Assumptions:
                                  T1
        6                               3 T3           1. As in Example 8.3, each component is analyzed as a control volume at
           5                                           steady state.
              8.0 MPa                                  2. Except for the two turbine stages, all processes are internally reversible.
                                                       3. The turbine and pump operate adiabatically.
                                   2                   4. The condensate exits the condenser as saturated liquid.
              0.7 MPa 2s                               5. Kinetic and potential energy effects are negligible.

              0.008 MPa             4s 4

                                                s
                                                        Figure E8.4a

  Analysis:

  (a) From the solution to Example 8.3, the following specific enthalpy values are known, in kJ/kg: h1  3348.4, h2s  2741.8,
  h3  3353.3, h4s  2428.5, h5  173.88, h6  181.94.

      The specific enthalpy at the exit of the first-stage turbine, h2, can be determined by solving the expression for the turbine
  efficiency to obtain

                         h2  h1  ht1h1  h2s2
                             3348.4  0.8513348.4  2741.82  2832.8 kJ/kg

  The specific enthalpy at the exit of the second-stage turbine can be found similarly:

                                    h4  h3  ht1h3  h4s2
                                        3353.3  0.8513353.3  2428.52  2567.2 kJ/kg

  The thermal efficiency is then

                                    1h1    h22    1h3    h42    1h6    h52
                                           1h1    h62    1h3    h22
                         h

                                    13348.4  2832.82  13353.3  2567.22  1181.94  173.882

                                                13348.4  181.942  13353.3  2832.82

                                    1293.6 kJ/kg   0.351 135.1%2

                                    3687.0 kJ/kg
                                                                  8.3 Improving Performance--Superheat and Reheat 345

(b) The IT code for the solution follows, where etat1 is t1, etat2 is t2, eta is , Wnet  W# netm# , and Qin  Q# inm# .

    // Fix the states

    T1 = 480 // °C
    p1 = 80 // bar
    h1 = h_PT("Water/Steam", p1, T1)
    s1 = s_PT("Water/Steam", p1, T1)

    p2 = 7 // bar
    h2s = h_Ps("Water/Steam", p2, s1)
    etat1 = 0.85
    h2 = h1 ­ etat1 * (h1 ­ h2s)

    T3 = 440 // °C
    p3 = p2
    h3 = h_PT("Water/Steam", p3, T3)
    s3 = s_PT("Water/Steam", p3, T3)

    p4 = 0.08 // bar
    h4s = h_Ps("Water/Steam", p4, s3)
    etat2 = etat1
    h4 = h3 ­ etat2 * (h3 ­ h4s)

    p5 = p4
    h5 = hsat_Px("Water/Steam", p5, 0) // kJ/kg
    v5 = vsat_Px("Water/Steam", p5, 0) // m3/kg

    p6 = p1
    h6 = h5 + v5 * (p6 ­ p5) * 100 // The 100 in this expression is a unit conversion factor.

    // Calculate thermal efficiency
    Wnet = (h1 ­ h2) + (h3 ­ h4) ­ (h6 ­ h5)
    Qin = (h1 ­ h6) + (h3 ­ h2)
    eta = Wnet /Qin

Using the Explore button, sweep eta from 0.85 to 1.0 in steps of 0.01. Then, using the Graph button, obtain the following plot:

                          0.42

Cycle thermal efficiency  0.40

                          0.38

                          0.36

                          0.34

                          0.32     0.90  0.95                     1.00
                             0.85                                              Figure E8.4b

                                   Isentropic turbine efficiency

    From Fig. E8.4b, we see that the cycle thermal efficiency increases from 0.351 to 0.403 as turbine stage efficiency increases
from 0.85 to 1.00, as expected based on the results of Examples 8.3(a) and 8.4(a). Turbine isentropic efficiency is seen to have
a significant effect on cycle thermal efficiency.

 Owing to the irreversibilities present in the turbine stages, the net work per unit of mass developed in the present case is

    significantly less than in the case of Example 8.3. The thermal efficiency is also considerably less.
346 Chapter 8 Vapor Power Systems

regeneration           8.4 Improving Performance--Regenerative
                                 Vapor Power Cycle

                       Another commonly used method for increasing the thermal efficiency of vapor power plants
                       is regenerative feedwater heating, or simply regeneration. This is the subject of the present
                       section.

                           To introduce the principle underlying regenerative feedwater heating, consider Fig. 8.3
                       once again. In cycle 1­2­3­4­a­1, the working fluid would enter the boiler as a compressed
                       liquid at state 4 and be heated while in the liquid phase to state a. With regenerative feed-
                       water heating, the working fluid would enter the boiler at a state between 4 and a. As a result,
                       the average temperature of heat addition would be increased, thereby tending to increase the
                       thermal efficiency.

open feedwater heater   8.4.1 Open Feedwater Heaters

                       Let us consider how regeneration can be accomplished using an open feedwater heater, a di-
                       rect contact-type heat exchanger in which streams at different temperatures mix to form a stream
                       at an intermediate temperature. Shown in Fig. 8.9 are the schematic diagram and the associ-
                       ated T­s diagram for a regenerative vapor power cycle having one open feedwater heater. For
                       this cycle, the working fluid passes isentropically through the turbine stages and pumps, and
                       the flow through the steam generator, condenser, and feedwater heater takes place with no pres-
                       sure drop in any of these components. Steam enters the first-stage turbine at state 1 and expands
                       to state 2, where a fraction of the total flow is extracted, or bled, into an open feedwater heater
                       operating at the extraction pressure, p2. The rest of the steam expands through the second-stage
                       turbine to state 3. This portion of the total flow is condensed to saturated liquid, state 4, and
                       then pumped to the extraction pressure and introduced into the feedwater heater at state 5. A
                       single mixed stream exits the feedwater heater at state 6. For the case shown in Fig. 8.9, the
                       mass flow rates of the streams entering the feedwater heater are chosen so that the stream exiting
                       the feedwater heater is a saturated liquid at the extraction pressure. The liquid at state 6 is then
                       pumped to the steam generator pressure and enters the steam generator at state 7. Finally, the
                       working fluid is heated from state 7 to state 1 in the steam generator.

                               Q· in                                   (1 ­ y)

                                              (1)  1                                        W· t

                                                                                                    T           1
                                                                                                             2
                                                              ( y)     2           (1 ­ y)                   3

                                Steam                                     3                                                  s
                               generator
                                                                                                          7

                                                              Condenser                     Q· out

                                                              (1 ­ y)                                  a6
                                                              5
                       (1)                           Open                                              5
                                                   feedwater                                           4
                            7         6
                                                     heater

                       Pump 2                         Pump 1                    4
                                       W· p2                           W· p1

                        Figure 8.9 Regenerative vapor power cycle with one open feedwater heater.
                                                                           8.4 Improving Performance--Regenerative Vapor Power Cycle 347

   Referring to the T­s diagram of the cycle, note that the heat addition would take place
from state 7 to state 1, rather than from state a to state 1, as would be the case without re-
generation. Accordingly, the amount of energy that must be supplied from the combustion
of a fossil fuel, or another source, to vaporize and superheat the steam would be reduced.
This is the desired outcome. Only a portion of the total flow expands through the second-
stage turbine (Process 2­3), however, so less work would be developed as well. In practice,
operating conditions are chosen so that the reduction in heat added more than offsets the
decrease in net work developed, resulting in an increased thermal efficiency in regenerative
power plants.

CYCLE ANALYSIS. Consider next the thermodynamic analysis of the regenerative cycle
illustrated in Fig. 8.9. An important initial step in analyzing any regenerative vapor cy-
cle is the evaluation of the mass flow rates through each of the components. Taking a
single control volume enclosing both turbine stages, the mass rate balance reduces at
steady state to

                                                   #      #        #
                                                  m2     m3       m1

where  #   is  the  rate  at  which    mass   enters  the  first-stage       turbine  at  state   1,      #  is   the  rate  at
       m1                                                         #                                   m2

which  mass     is  extracted  and     exits  at  state  2, and      m3  is  the  rate    at  which       mass    exits  the
                                                           #
second-stage turbine at state 3. Dividing by m1 places this on the basis of a unit of mass

passing through the first-stage turbine

                                                  ##
                                                  m2     m3
                                                   #      #       1
                                                  m1 m1

Denoting   the  fraction  of   the  total  flow   extracted   at  state  2   by   y  (y        #  m# 1),     the  fraction   of
                                                                                              m2

the total flow passing through the second-stage turbine is

                                                  #
                                                  m3
                                                   #       1      y                                                    (8.11)
                                                  m1

The fractions of the total flow at various locations are indicated on Fig. 8.9.
   The fraction y can be determined by applying the conservation of mass and conservation

of energy principles to a control volume around the feedwater heater. Assuming no heat trans-
fer between the feedwater heater and its surroundings and ignoring kinetic and potential en-
ergy effects, the mass and energy rate balances reduce at steady state to give

                                        0  yh2  11  y2h5  h6

Solving for y

                                                  y  h6  h5                                                            (8.12)
                                                       h2  h5

Equation 8.12 allows the fraction y to be determined when states 2, 5, and 6 are fixed.

Expressions for the principal work and heat transfers of the regenerative cycle can be de-

termined by applying mass and energy rate balances to control volumes around the individ-

ual components. Beginning with the turbine, the total work is the sum of the work developed

by each turbine stage. Neglecting kinetic and potential energy effects and assuming no heat

transfer with the surroundings, we can express the total turbine work on the basis of a unit

of mass passing through the first-stage turbine as

                                    #

                                    Wt     1h1    h22        11      y2 1h2    h32                                     (8.13)
                                     #
                                    m1
348 Chapter 8 Vapor Power Systems

                         The total pump work is the sum of the work required to operate each pump individually. On

                         the basis of a unit of mass passing through the first-stage turbine, the total pump work is

                                                                       #

                                                                 Wp            1h7     h62     11      y2 1h5    h42     (8.14)
                                                                  #
                                                                 m1

                         The energy added by heat transfer to the working fluid passing through the steam generator,

                         per unit of mass expanding through the first-stage turbine, is

                                                                                    #

                                                                                    Qin        h1    h7                  (8.15)
                                                                                     #
                                                                                    m1

                         and the energy rejected by heat transfer to the cooling water is

                                                                               #

                                                                            Qout       11      y2 1h3     h42            (8.16)
                                                                              #
                                                                            m1

                            The following example illustrates the analysis of a regenerative cycle with one open feed-
                         water heater, including the evaluation of properties at state points around the cycle and the
                         determination of the fractions of the total flow at various locations.

  E X A M P L E 8 . 5 Regenerative Cycle with Open Feedwater Heater

  Consider a regenerative vapor power cycle with one open feedwater heater. Steam enters the turbine at 8.0 MPa, 480C and
  expands to 0.7 MPa, where some of the steam is extracted and diverted to the open feedwater heater operating at 0.7 MPa.
  The remaining steam expands through the second-stage turbine to the condenser pressure of 0.008 MPa. Saturated liquid ex-
  its the open feedwater heater at 0.7 MPa. The isentropic efficiency of each turbine stage is 85% and each pump operates isen-
  tropically. If the net power output of the cycle is 100 MW, determine (a) the thermal efficiency and (b) the mass flow rate of
  steam entering the first turbine stage, in kg/h.

  SOLUTION

  Known: A regenerative vapor power cycle operates with steam as the working fluid. Operating pressures and temperatures
  are specified; the efficiency of each turbine stage and the net power output are also given.

  Find: Determine the thermal efficiency and the mass flow rate into the turbine, in kg/h.

  Schematic and Given Data:

                                                     (1 ­ y)

   Steam                                     (1)                 W· t       T                             1
  generator                                                                                                  T1
                         T1 = 480°C
                         p1 = 8.0 MPa

                         1

                                    ( y)          2                                            8.0 MPa
                                                                                       7 0.7 MPa 2s 2
                                                     3

                                    Condenser                                               6

             Saturated              (1 ­ y)                      (1 ­ y)                       0.008 MPa
             liquid at              5                                          5
             0.7 MPa
  (1)                      Open                                  pcond =            4                          3s 3
          7       6      feedwater
                                                              4  0.008 MPa                                            s
                           heater

  Pump 2                    Pump 1                           Saturated liquid
                  W· p2                                        at 0.008 MPa

                                                     W· p1

                                                                                                                          Figure E8.5
                                                                  8.4 Improving Performance--Regenerative Vapor Power Cycle 349

Assumptions:

1. Each component in the cycle is analyzed as a steady-state control volume. The control volumes are shown in the accom-
panying sketch by dashed lines.
2. All processes of the working fluid are internally reversible, except for the expansions through the two turbine stages and
mixing in the open feedwater heater.
3. The turbines, pumps, and feedwater heater operate adiabatically.
4. Kinetic and potential energy effects are negligible.
5. Saturated liquid exits the open feedwater heater, and saturated liquid exits the condenser.

Analysis: The specific enthalpy at states 1 and 4 can be read from the steam tables. The specific enthalpy at state 2 is eval-
uated in the solution to Example 8.4. The specific entropy at state 2 can be obtained from the steam tables using the known
values of enthalpy and pressure at this state. In summary, h1  3348.4 kJ/kg, h2  2832.8 kJ/kg, s2  6.8606 kJ/kg # K, h4 
173.88 kJ/kg.

    The specific enthalpy at state 3 can be determined using the efficiency of the second-stage turbine

                                                              h3  h2  ht1h2  h3s2

With s3s  s2, the quality at state 3s is x3s  0.8208; using this, we get h3s  2146.3 kJ/kg. Hence

                                          h3  2832.8  0.8512832.8  2146.32  2249.3 kJ/kg

    State 6 is saturated liquid at 0.7 MPa. Thus, h6  697.22 kJ/kg.
    Since the pumps are assumed to operate with no irreversibilities, the specific enthalpy values at states 5 and 7 can be
determined as

h5  h4  v41 p5  p42

 173.88  11.0084  1032 1m3/kg2 10.7  0.0082 MPa                                         `  106 N/m2  `     1 kJ         174.6 kJ/kg
                                                                                                        ` 103 N # m `
                                                                                           1 MPa

h7  h6  v61 p7  p62
    697.22  11.1080  1032 18.0  0.72103  705.3 kJ/kg

    Applying mass and energy rate balances to a control volume enclosing the open heater, we find the fraction y of the flow
extracted at state 2 from

                                             y        h6      h5      697.22     174.6       0.1966
                                                      h2      h5      2832.8     174.6

(a) On the basis of a unit of mass passing through the first-stage turbine, the total turbine work output is

#

Wt                                 1h1     h22        11      y2 1h2      h32
 #
m1

                                 13348.4  2832.82  10.8034212832.8  2249.32  984.4 kJ/kg

The total pump work per unit of mass passing through the first-stage turbine is

                                #

   Wp                                1h7     h62          11      y2 1h5    h42
    #
   m1

                                    1705.3  697.222  10.80342 1174.6  173.882  8.7 kJ/kg

The heat added in the steam generator per unit of mass passing through the first-stage turbine is

                                        #

                                        Qin     h1        h7      3348.4         705.3     2643.1  kJ/kg
                                         #
                                        m1

The thermal efficiency is then

                                            #   m# 1       #  m# 1        984.4  8.7               1 36.9 % 2
                                           Wt             Wp                 2643.1
                                                                                           0.369
                                   h             #    m# 1
                                                Qin
350 Chapter 8 Vapor Power Systems

                                                                        #
(b) The mass flow rate of the steam entering the turbine, m1, can be determined using the given value for the net power out-
put, 100 MW. Since

                                                    #        ##

                                                    Wcycle  Wt  Wp

and                                                                       #

                                      #                                Wp
                                                                        #
                                      Wt    984.4  kJ/kg     and               8.7  kJ/kg
                                       #
                                      m1                               m1

it follows that

                          #           1100 MW23600 s/h    `  103 kJ/s  `      3.69  105 kg/h
                         m1           1984.4  8.72 kJ/kg     1 MW

 Note that the fractions of the total flow at various locations are labeled on the figure.

closed feedwater heater   8.4.2 Closed Feedwater Heaters

                         Regenerative feedwater heating also can be accomplished with closed feedwater heaters.
                         Closed heaters are shell-and-tube-type recuperators in which the feedwater temperature in-
                         creases as the extracted steam condenses on the outside of the tubes carrying the feedwater.
                         Since the two streams do not mix, they can be at different pressures. The diagrams of Fig. 8.10
                         show two different schemes for removing the condensate from closed feedwater heaters. In
                         Fig. 8.10a, this is accomplished by means of a pump whose function is to pump the con-
                         densate forward to a higher-pressure point in the cycle. In Fig. 8.10b, the condensate is al-
                         lowed to pass through a trap into a feedwater heater operating at a lower pressure or into the
                         condenser. A trap is a type of valve that permits only liquid to pass through to a region of
                         lower pressure.

                            A regenerative vapor power cycle having one closed feedwater heater with the condensate
                         trapped into the condenser is shown schematically in Fig. 8.11. For this cycle, the working
                         fluid passes isentropically through the turbine stages and pumps, and there are no pressure
                         drops accompanying the flow through the other components. The T­s diagram shows the
                         principal states of the cycle. The total steam flow expands through the first-stage turbine from
                         state 1 to state 2. At this location, a fraction of the flow is bled into the closed feedwater
                         heater, where it condenses. Saturated liquid at the extraction pressure exits the feedwater
                         heater at state 7. The condensate is then trapped into the condenser, where it is reunited with

                                                                                                            Extraction steam

                                                          Extraction steam

                         Feedwater                                Feedwater
                             out                                       in

                                         Pump             Condensate                       Condensate       Steam trap

                          To higher                                                                            To lower-
                         pressure line                                                                      pressure heater
                                                                                                             or condenser

                                               (a)                                                     (b)

                          Figure 8.10 Examples of closed feedwater heaters.
                                                                      8.4 Improving Performance--Regenerative Vapor Power Cycle 351

·Qin

                                   (1 ­ y)

               (1)                                   W· t

                    1

                                   2        3 (1 ­ y)                 T

                                                                                           1

                       ( y)

 Steam                 Condenser                              Q· out
generator

     (1)                     (1)                                                  7     2
   6                               Pump
                                                  4                            6

                                 5

      Closed                 W· p                                        5
     feedwater         7
                                      Trap               (y)                4        8     3
       heater             (y)                        8                                                    s

 Figure 8.11 Regenerative vapor power cycle with one closed feedwater heater.

the portion of the total flow passing through the second-stage turbine. The expansion from
state 7 to state 8 through the trap is irreversible, so it is shown by a dashed line on the T­s
diagram. The total flow exiting the condenser as saturated liquid at state 4 is pumped to the
steam generator pressure and enters the feedwater heater at state 5. The temperature of the
feedwater is increased in passing through the feedwater heater. The feedwater then exits at
state 6. The cycle is completed as the working fluid is heated in the steam generator at con-
stant pressure from state 6 to state 1. Although the closed heater shown on the figure oper-
ates with no pressure drop in either stream, there is a source of irreversibility due to the
stream-to-stream temperature differences.

CYCLE ANALYSIS. The schematic diagram of the cycle shown in Fig. 8.11 is labeled with
the fractions of the total flow at various locations. This is usually helpful in analyzing such
cycles. The fraction of the total flow extracted, y, can be determined by applying the con-
servation of mass and conservation of energy principles to a control volume around the closed
heater. Assuming no heat transfer between the feedwater heater and its surroundings and ne-
glecting kinetic and potential energy effects, the mass and energy rate balances reduce at
steady state to give

                                   0  y 1h2  h72  1h5  h62

Solving for y

                                            y  h6  h5                                         (8.17)
                                                 h2  h7

The principal work and heat transfers are evaluated as discussed previously.

 8.4.3 Multiple Feedwater Heaters

The thermal efficiency of the regenerative cycle can be increased by incorporating several
feedwater heaters at suitably chosen pressures. The number of feedwater heaters used is based
on economic considerations, since incremental increases in thermal efficiency achieved with
each additional heater must justify the added capital costs (heater, piping, pumps, etc.). Power
352 Chapter 8 Vapor Power Systems

                     Steam                5
                   generator
            Q· in                           4                                             W· t
                                      1
                   21
                              Closed           23
                              heater
                                                                67                                   8
                                15
                                                                                          Condenser     Q· out

                                           Closed               Deaerating        Closed
                                      14 heater                    open     11 heater
                                                                  heater
                                                   W· p2 13 12              W· p1 10                 9  20

                                      16                                    19
                                                                                                       Condensate
                                          17   Main boiler                                                 pump

                                               18 feed pump

             Figure 8.12 Example of a power plant layout.

deaeration  plant designers use computer programs to simulate the thermodynamic and economic per-
            formance of different designs to help them decide on the number of heaters to use, the types
            of heaters, and the pressures at which they should operate.

               Figure 8.12 shows the layout of a power plant with three closed feedwater heaters and
            one open heater. Power plants with multiple feedwater heaters ordinarily have at least one
            open feedwater heater operating at a pressure greater than atmospheric pressure so that oxygen
            and other dissolved gases can be vented from the cycle. This procedure, known as deaeration,
            is needed to maintain the purity of the working fluid in order to minimize corrosion. Actual
            power plants have many of the same basic features as the one shown in the figure.

               In analyzing regenerative vapor power cycles with multiple feedwater heaters, it is good
            practice to base the analysis on a unit of mass entering the first-stage turbine. To clarify the
            quantities of matter flowing through the various plant components, the fractions of the total
            flow removed at each extraction point and the fraction of the total flow remaining at each
            state point in the cycle should be labeled on a schematic diagram of the cycle. The fractions
            extracted are determined from mass and energy rate balances for control volumes around each
            of the feedwater heaters, starting with the highest-pressure heater and proceeding to each
            lower-pressure heater in turn. This procedure is used in the next example that involves a
            reheat­regenerative vapor power cycle with two feedwater heaters, one open feedwater heater
            and one closed feedwater heater.

E X A M P L E 8 . 6 Reheat­Regenerative Cycle with Two Feedwater Heaters

Consider a reheat­regenerative vapor power cycle with two feedwater heaters, a closed feedwater heater and an open feed-
water heater. Steam enters the first turbine at 8.0 MPa, 480C and expands to 0.7 MPa. The steam is reheated to 440C be-
fore entering the second turbine, where it expands to the condenser pressure of 0.008 MPa. Steam is extracted from the first
turbine at 2 MPa and fed to the closed feedwater heater. Feedwater leaves the closed heater at 205C and 8.0 MPa, and con-
densate exits as saturated liquid at 2 MPa. The condensate is trapped into the open feedwater heater. Steam extracted from
the second turbine at 0.3 MPa is also fed into the open feedwater heater, which operates at 0.3 MPa. The stream exiting the
open feedwater heater is saturated liquid at 0.3 MPa. The net power output of the cycle is 100 MW. There is no stray heat
transfer from any component to its surroundings. If the working fluid experiences no irreversibilities as it passes through the
                                               8.4 Improving Performance--Regenerative Vapor Power Cycle 353

turbines, pumps, steam generator, reheater, and condenser, determine (a) the thermal efficiency, (b) the mass flow rate of the
steam entering the first turbine, in kg/h.

SOLUTION
Known: A reheat­regenerative vapor power cycle operates with steam as the working fluid. Operating pressures and tem-
peratures are specified, and the net power output is given.
Find: Determine the thermal efficiency and the mass flow rate entering the first turbine, in kg/h.
Schematic and Given Data:

                                                       T                             1 T1 = 480°C

                                                                                     4 T4 = 440°C

                                                                8.0 MPa 2

                                                             11 12 2.0 MPa

                                                          10
                                                                          0.7 MPa 3

                                                             9 13 0.3 MPa                      5

                                                          8
                                                                        0.008 MPa

                        T4 = 440°C                        7                                 6
                                    4
         Steam                                                                                     s
       generator        (1 ­ y´) 3

Q· in

                       (1)                                      W· t
                  1

                  T1 = 480°C           2

                                                    5        6              (1 ­ y' ­ y'')
                                               (y'')
                  (y')

                                                                Condenser
                                                                0.008 MPa

                                                                                        Q· out

         (1)      Closed                  (1)   Open
                   heater            10 9       heater
            11                                 0.3 MPa
T11 = 205°C       2.0 MPa
                                                                   87
                  12          W· p2                       W· p1
                                               13
                                     Pump 2
                                                                    Pump 1

                                     (y')      Trap

                                                                                                       Figure E8.6
354 Chapter 8 Vapor Power Systems

Assumptions:

1. Each component in the cycle is analyzed as a control volume at steady state. The control volumes are shown on the
accompanying sketch by dashed lines.
2. There is no stray heat transfer from any component to its surroundings.
3. The working fluid undergoes internally reversible processes as it passes through the turbines, pumps, steam generator,
reheater, and condenser.
4. The expansion through the trap is a throttling process.
5. Kinetic and potential energy effects are negligible.
6. Condensate exits the closed heater as a saturated liquid at 2 MPa. Feedwater exits the open heater as a saturated liquid at
0.3 MPa. Condensate exits the condenser as a saturated liquid.

Analysis: Let us determine the specific enthalpies at the principal states of the cycle. State 1 is the same as in Example 8.3,
so h1  3348.4 kJ/kg and s1  6.6586 kJ/kg # K.

    State 2 is fixed by p2  2.0 MPa and the specific entropy s2, which is the same as that of state 1. Interpolating in Table A-4,
we get h2  2963.5 kJ/kg. The state at the exit of the first turbine is the same as at the exit of the first turbine of Example 8.3, so
h3  2741.8 kJ/kg.

    State 4 is superheated vapor at 0.7 MPa, 440C. From Table A-4, h4  3353.3 kJ/kg and s4  7.7571 kJ/kg # K. Interpo-
lating in Table A-4 at p5  0.3 MPa and s5  s4  7.7571 kJ/kg # K, the enthalpy at state 5 is h5  3101.5 kJ/kg.

    Using s6  s4, the quality at state 6 is found to be x6  0.9382. So

                                               h6  hf  x6hfg

                                                   173.88  10.938222403.1  2428.5 kJ/kg

    At the condenser exit, h7  173.88 kJ/kg. The specific enthalpy at the exit of the first pump is

                                           h8  h7  v71 p8  p72
                                               173.88  11.0084210.3  0.0082  174.17 kJ/kg

The required unit conversions were considered in previous examples.
    The liquid leaving the open feedwater heater at state 9 is saturated liquid at 0.3 MPa. The specific enthalpy is h9  561.47

kJ/kg. The specific enthalpy at the exit of the second pump is

                                     h10  h9  v9 1 p10  p92
                                          561.47  11.07322 18.0  0.32  569.73 kJ/kg

    The condensate leaving the closed heater is saturated at 2 MPa. From Table A-3, h12  908.79 kJ/kg. The fluid passing
through the trap undergoes a throttling process, so h13  908.79 kJ/kg.

    The specific enthalpy of the feedwater exiting the closed heater at 8.0 MPa and 205C is found using Eq. 3.13 as

                                     h11  hf  vf 1 p11  psat2
                                          875.1  11.16462 18.0  1.732  882.4 kJ/kg

where hf and vf are the saturated liquid specific enthalpy and specific volume at 205C, respectively, and psat is the saturation

pressure in MPa at this temperature. Alternatively, h11 can be found from Table A-5.

    The schematic diagram of the cycle is labeled with the fractions of the total flow into the turbine that remain at various
                                                                                                                               #  m# 1
locations. The fractions of the      total flow diverted to the closed heater and    open  heater,  respectively,  are  yż    m2        and
       #  m# 1,          #           the mass flow rate entering the first turbine.
y­    m5         where  m1  denotes

    The fraction y can be determined by application of mass and energy rate balances to a control volume enclosing the closed

heater. The result is

                                     yż    h11  h10    882.4  569.73                 0.1522
                                           h2  h12     2963.5  908.79

    The fraction y can be determined by application of mass and energy rate balances to a control volume enclosing the open
heater, resulting in

                                     0  y­h5  11  yż  y­ 2h8  yżh13  h9
                                                                          8.4 Improving Performance--Regenerative Vapor Power Cycle 355

  Solving for y

                                            y­  11  yż 2h8  yżh13  h9
                                                             h8  h5

                                                     10.84782174.17  10.15222908.79  561.47

                                                                           174.17  3101.5

                                                    0.0941

  (a) The following work and heat transfer values are expressed on the basis of a unit mass entering the first turbine. The work
  developed by the first turbine per unit of mass entering is the sum

                                     #

                                     Wt1           1h1        h22      11     yż 2 1h2       h32
                                      #
                                     m1

                                               13348.4  2963.52  10.84782 12963.5  2741.82

                                               572.9 kJ/kg

  Similarly, for the second turbine

                           #

                           Wt2              11       yż 2 1h4        h52      11     yż       y­ 2 1h5    h62
                            #
                           m1

                                      10.8478213353.3  3101.52  10.7537213101.5  2428.52

                                      720.7 kJ/kg

  For the first pump                            #

                                            Wp1            11      yż      y­ 2 1h8      h72
                                             #
                                            m1

                                                      10.75372 1174.17  173.882  0.22 kJ/kg

  and for the second pump                               #

                                                     Wp2           1h10       h92
                                                      #
                                                     m1

                                                                569.73  561.47  8.26 kJ/kg

  The total heat added is the sum of the energy added by heat transfer during boiling/superheating and reheating. When

  expressed on the basis of a unit of mass entering the first turbine, this is

                                         #

                                     Qin           1h1         h112       11       yż 2 1h4    h32
                                      #
                                     m1

                                               13348.4  882.42  10.8478213353.3  2741.82

                                               2984.4 kJ/kg

  With the foregoing values, the thermal efficiency is

                                                   W# t1m# 1       W# t2m# 1  W# p1m# 1           W# p2m# 1
                                                                        Q# inm# 1
                                     h

                                             572.9  720.7  0.22  8.26  0.431 143.1%2
                                                              2984.4

  (b) The mass flow rate entering the first turbine can be determined using the given value of the net power output. Thus

                                                                           #

                                      #         W# t1m# 1             Wcycle                   W# p2m# 1
                                     m1
                                                               W# t2m# 1  W# p1m# 1

                                                1100 MW23600 s/h 103 kW/MW                           2.8  105 kg / h

                                                               1285.1 kJ/kg

   Compared to the corresponding values determined for the simple Rankine cycle of Example 8.1, the thermal efficiency of

      the present regenerative cycle is substantially greater and the mass flow rate is considerably less.
356 Chapter 8 Vapor Power Systems

              8.5 Other Vapor Cycle Aspects

              In this section we consider aspects of vapor cycles related to working fluid characteristics,
              binary vapor cycles, and cogeneration systems.

              WORKING FLUID CHARACTERISTICS. Water is used as the working fluid in the vast majority
              of vapor power systems because it is plentiful and low in cost, nontoxic, chemically stable, and
              relatively noncorrosive. In addition, water has a relatively large change in specific enthalpy
              when it vaporizes at ordinary steam generator pressures, which tends to limit the mass flow
              rate for a desired power plant output. The properties of liquid water and water vapor are also
              such that the back work ratios achieved are characteristically quite low, and the techniques of
              superheat, reheat, and regeneration can be effective for increasing power plant efficiencies.

                 Water is less satisfactory insofar as some other desirable working fluid characteristics
              are concerned. For example, the critical temperature of water is only 374.14C, which
              is about 225C below the maximum allowable turbine inlet temperatures. Accordingly,
              to achieve a high average temperature of heat addition and realize the attendant higher
              thermal efficiency, it may be necessary for the steam generator to operate at supercritical
              pressures. This requires costly piping and heat exchanger tubes capable of withstanding great
              stresses. Another undesirable characteristic of water is that its saturation pressure at ordinary
              condenser temperatures is well below atmospheric pressure. As a result, air can leak into the
              system, necessitating the use of special ejector pumps attached to the condenser or deaera-
              ting feedwater heaters to remove the air.

                 Although water has some shortcomings as a working fluid, no other single working fluid
              has been found that is more satisfactory overall for large electrical generating plants. Still,
              vapor power cycles intended for special uses may employ working fluids that are better
              matched to the application at hand than water. Cycles that operate at relatively low temper-
              atures may perform best with a refrigerant such as ammonia as the working fluid. Power sys-
              tems for high-temperature applications may employ substances having desirable performance
              characteristics at these temperatures. Moreover, water may be used together with some other
              substance in a binary vapor cycle to achieve better overall performance than could be real-
              ized with water alone.

binary cycle  BINARY VAPOR CYCLE. In a binary vapor power cycle two working fluids are used, one
              with good high-temperature characteristics and another with good characteristics at the lower-
              temperature end of the operating range.  for example. . . Fig. 8.13 shows a schematic
              diagram and an accompanying T­s diagram of a binary vapor cycle using water and a suitable
              liquid metal, with each substance in both the liquid and vapor phases. In this arrangement,
              two ideal Rankine cycles are combined, with the heat rejection from the high-temperature cy-
              cle (the topping cycle) being used as the energy input for the low-temperature cycle. This
              energy transfer is accomplished in an interconnecting heat exchanger, which serves as the
              condenser for the metal cycle and the boiler for the water cycle. Since the increase in the spe-
              cific enthalpy of the water as it passes through the heat exchanger is typically several times
              the magnitude of the specific enthalpy decrease of the metal, several units of mass of metal
              must circulate in the topping cycle for each unit of mass of water in the other cycle. 

                 Binary vapor power cycles can operate with higher average temperatures of heat addition
              than conventional cycles using water only and thus can attain higher thermal efficiencies.
              However, the higher efficiencies achieved in this manner must justify the increased costs
              related to the construction and operation of the more complex cycle arrangement.

              COGENERATION. The binary cycle considered above is just one example of how systems
              can be linked to obtain overall systems that utilize fuel more effectively. Other examples are
                                                                                         8.5 Other Vapor Cycle Aspects 357

                   a                    Water vapor

                   e                                                         ·           Water cycle:
                                                                            Wt 2          a­b­c­ d­e
     1                                                         Turbine
                                        W· t 1
                   Turbine                               Steam
                                                         condenser                                 Metal
                                     2                                                   topping cycle:
     Steam superheater                                                   b
     and metal boiler                                                                       1­2­3­ 4 ­1

                                                                                  T
                                                                                                                  1

     Metal condenser                                                                           a
     and steam boiler
                                                                                         2
     Liquid metal                                                      c              4  e
                                        3                                             3
                                                                                             b
                                                           d                      d                 s
                                                                                    c

     4                                          Pump             Pump

 Figure 8.13 Water­metal binary vapor cycle.

discussed in Secs. 7.6 and 7.7, including the multiple-use strategy known as cogeneration.                           cogeneration
In each of the following two paragraphs we consider applications of cogeneration.

   Direct combustion heating and the generation of process steam together account for a sub-
stantial portion of industrial energy resource use. But because the heat and steam are often
required at a relatively low temperature, good use is not made of the relatively high-
temperature products of combustion obtained by burning fuel. This source of inefficiency
can be reduced with a cogeneration arrangement in which fuel is consumed to produce both
electricity and steam (or heat), but with a total cost less than would be required to produce
them individually. A schematic of such a cogeneration system is shown in Fig. 8.14. The
figure is labeled with the fractions of the total flow entering the steam turbine that remain at
various locations. On the basis of a unit of mass entering the turbine at state 1, a fraction y
is extracted at an intermediate point 2 and diverted to some process that requires steam at

              (1)                  ·                     (1 ­ y)
     1                            Wt                                   3

                            Turbine
                               2

     Steam                              y
     generator                                      Condenser

                            System

                            requiring

·                           process
Qin
                            steam

               Pump 2                        y           Pump 1
     6                                  5
                                                                                   Figure 8.14 Schematic
     (1)           W· p2                        (1 ­ y)  W· p1   4                of a cogeneration system in
                                                                                  which process steam is bled
                                                                                  from the turbine.
358 Chapter 8 Vapor Power Systems

district heating  this condition. The remaining fraction, 1  y, expands to the turbine exit at state 3, producing
                  power in addition to that developed by the first turbine stage. Eventually this fraction rejoins
                  the amount extracted and the combined stream is returned to the steam generator. When no
                  process steam is required, all of the steam generated by the steam generator is allowed to
                  expand through the turbine.

                     Industries such as pulp and paper production and food processing, which require steam
                  for various processes in addition to electricity for operating machines, lighting, etc., are
                  particularly well suited for the use of cogeneration. Another cogeneration arrangement
                  being used increasingly involves district heating. In this application a power plant is in-
                  tegrated into a community so that it provides electricity for industrial, commercial, and do-
                  mestic use together with steam for process needs, space heating, and domestic water heat-
                  ing. District heating is commonly used in northern Europe and is being increasingly used
                  in the United States.

                  8.6 Case Study: Exergy Accounting of a
                            Vapor Power Plant1

                  The discussions to this point show that a useful picture of power plant performance can be
                  obtained with the conservation of mass and conservation of energy principles. However,
                  these principles provide only the quantities of energy transferred to and from the plant and
                  do not consider the utility of the different types of energy transfer. For example, with the
                  conservation principles alone, a unit of energy exiting as generated electricity is regarded
                  as equivalent to a unit of energy exiting in relatively low-temperature cooling water, even
                  though the electricity has greater utility and economic value. Also, nothing can be learned
                  with the conservation principles alone about the relative significance of the irreversibilities
                  present in the various plant components and the losses associated with those components.
                  The method of exergy analysis introduced in Chap. 7 allows issues such as these to be dealt
                  with quantitatively.

                  EXERGY ACCOUNTING. In this section we account for the exergy entering a power plant
                  with the fuel. (Means for evaluating the fuel exergy are introduced in Sec. 13.6.) A portion
                  of the fuel exergy is ultimately returned to the plant surroundings as the net work developed.
                  However, the largest part is either destroyed by irreversibilities within the various plant com-
                  ponents or carried from the plant by the cooling water, stack gases, and unavoidable heat
                  transfers with the surroundings. These considerations are illustrated in the present section by
                  three solved examples, treating respectively the boiler, turbine and pump, and condenser of
                  a simple vapor power plant.

                      The irreversibilities present in each power plant component exact a tariff on the ex-
                  ergy supplied to the plant, as measured by the exergy destroyed in that component. The
                  component levying the greatest tariff is the boiler, for a significant portion of the exergy
                  entering the plant with the fuel is destroyed by irreversibilities within it. There are two
                  main sources of irreversibility in the boiler: (1) the irreversible heat transfer occurring be-
                  tween the hot combustion gases and the working fluid of the vapor power cycle flowing
                  through the boiler tubes, and (2) the combustion process itself. To simplify the present
                  discussion, the boiler is considered to consist of a combustor unit in which fuel and air
                  are burned to produce hot combustion gases, followed by a heat exchanger unit where the
                  cycle working fluid is vaporized as the hot gases cool. This idealization is illustrated in
                  Fig. 8.15.

                  1Chapter 7 is a prerequisite for the study of this section.
                                                              8.6 Case Study: Exergy Accounting of a Vapor Power Plant 359

                 Exiting stack gases

      Combustor        Heat exchanger unit
      unit

      Hot combustion

Fuel  products

Air
                                               Cycle working
                                               fluid

                 Pump                 Turbine

                                                              Net power out

      Condenser        Cooling                                                Figure 8.15 Power
                       water out                                             plant schematic for the
           Cooling                                                           exergy analysis case study.
           water in

   For the purposes of illustration, let us assume that 30% of the exergy entering the com-
bustion unit with the fuel is destroyed by the combustion irreversibility and 1% of the fuel
exergy exits the heat exchanger unit with the stack gases. The corresponding values for an
actual power plant might differ from these nominal values. However, they provide charac-
teristic values for discussion. (Means for evaluating the combustion exergy destruction and
the exergy accompanying the exiting stack gases are introduced in Chap. 13.) Using the fore-
going values for the combustion exergy destruction and stack gas loss, it follows that a maxi-
mum of 69% of the fuel exergy remains for transfer from the hot combustion gases to the
cycle working fluid. It is from this portion of the fuel exergy that the net work developed by
the plant is obtained. In Examples 8.7 through 8.9, we account for the exergy supplied by
the hot combustion gases passing through the heat exchanger unit. The principal results of
this series of examples are reported in Table 8.1. Carefully note that the values of Table 8.1
are keyed to the vapor power plant of Example 8.2 and thus have only qualitative signifi-
cance for vapor power plants in general.

CASE STUDY CONCLUSIONS. The entries of Table 8.1 suggest some general observa-
tions about vapor power plant performance. First, the table shows that the exergy destruc-
tions are more significant than the plant losses. The largest portion of the exergy entering
the plant with the fuel is destroyed, with exergy destruction in the boiler overshadowing
all others. By contrast, the loss associated with heat transfer to the cooling water is rela-
tively unimportant. The cycle thermal efficiency (calculated in the solution to Ex. 8.2) is
31.4%, so over two-thirds (68.6%) of the energy supplied to the cycle working fluid is
subsequently carried out by the condenser cooling water. By comparison, the amount of
exergy carried out is virtually negligible because the temperature of the cooling water is
raised only a few degrees over that of the surroundings and thus has limited utility. The
loss amounts to only 1% of the exergy entering the plant with the fuel. Similarly, losses
accompanying unavoidable heat transfer with the surroundings and the exiting stack gases
typically amount only to a few percent of the exergy entering the plant with the fuel and
are generally overstated when considered from the perspective of conservation of energy
alone.
360 Chapter 8 Vapor Power Systems

TABLE 8.1 Vapor Power Plant Exergy Accountinga

Outputs                                                    30%
   Net power outb
   Losses                                                    1%
      Condenser cooling waterc                               1%
      Stack gases (assumed)
                                                           30%
Exergy Destruction                                         30%
   Boiler                                                    5%
      Combustion unit (assumed)
      Heat exchanger unitd                                    --
   Turbinee                                                  3%
   Pump f                                                 100%
   Condenser g                                    cExample 8.9.
                                                  dExample 8.7.
Total                                             eExample 8.8.
                                                  fExample 8.8.
aAll values are expressed as a percentage of      gExample 8.9.
the exergy carried into the plant with the fuel.
Values are rounded to the nearest full percent.
Exergy losses associated with stray heat trans-
fer from plant components are ignored.

bExample 8.8

                                An exergy analysis allows the sites where destructions or losses occur to be identified and
                             rank ordered for significance. This knowledge is useful in directing attention to aspects of
                             plant performance that offer the greatest opportunities for improvement through the applica-
                             tion of practical engineering measures. However, the decision to adopt any particular modi-
                             fication is governed by economic considerations that take into account both economies in
                             fuel use and the costs incurred to achieve those economies.

                                The calculations presented in the following examples illustrate the application of exergy
                             principles through the analysis of a simple vapor power plant. There are no fundamental dif-
                             ficulties, however, in applying the methodology to actual power plants, including consider-
                             ation of the combustion process. The same procedures also can be used for exergy accounting
                             of the gas turbine power plants considered in Chap. 9 and other types of thermal systems.

                                The following example illustrates the exergy analysis of the heat exchanger unit of the
                             boiler of the case study vapor power plant.

E X A M P L E 8 . 7 Cycle Exergy Analysis--Heat Exchanger Unit

The heat exchanger unit of the boiler of Example 8.2 has a stream of water entering as a liquid at 8.0 MPa and exiting as a satu-
rated vapor at 8.0 MPa. In a separate stream, gaseous products of combustion cool at a constant pressure of 1 atm from 1107 to
547C. The gaseous stream can be modeled as air as an ideal gas. Let T0  22C, p0  1 atm. Determine (a) the net rate at which
exergy is carried into the heat exchanger unit by the gas stream, in MW, (b) the net rate at which exergy is carried from the heat
exchanger by the water stream, in MW, (c) the rate of exergy destruction, in MW, (d) the exergetic efficiency given by Eq. 7.45.

SOLUTION

Known: A heat exchanger at steady state has a water stream entering and exiting at known states and a separate gas stream
entering and exiting at known states.

Find: Determine the net rate at which exergy is carried into the heat exchanger by the gas stream, in MW, the net rate at
which exergy is carried from the heat exchanger by the water stream, in MW, the rate of exergy destruction, in MW, and the
exergetic efficiency.
                                                                               8.6 Case Study: Exergy Accounting of a Vapor Power Plant 361

Schematic and Given Data:

  547°C, e                                   Air         i 1107°C,
  1 atm
                                                             1 atm
Liquid, 4
8.0 MPa                                                  1 Steam
                                                             saturated vapor,
                                                             8.0 MPa                       Figure E8.7

Assumptions:
                                                                                                             ##

1. The control volume shown in the accompanying figure operates at steady state with Qcv  Wcv  0.
2. Kinetic and potential energy effects can be ignored.

3. The gaseous combustion products are modeled as air as an ideal gas.

4. The air and the water each pass through the steam generator at constant pressure.

5. Only 69% of the exergy entering the plant with the fuel remains after accounting for the stack loss and combustion exergy
destruction.
6. T0  22C, p0  1 atm.

Analysis: The analysis begins by evaluating the mass flow rate of the air in terms of the mass flow rate of the water. The
air and water pass through the boiler in separate streams. Hence, at steady state the conservation of mass principle requires

                                                                        #       #         1air2
                                                                       mi      me         1water2

                                                                     #          #
                                                                    m4         m1

Using these relations, an energy rate balance for the overall control volume reduces a steady state to

                                                    0         #0     #       0  m# a1hi     he2          #  1  h4    h12
                                                             Qcv    Wcv                                 m
                                                                             

         ##

where    Qcv   # Wcv        0   by  assumption  1,   and     the  kinetic  and  potential        energy     terms    are  dropped  by  assumption  2.     In  this  equa-
      #
tion ma and m denote, respectively, the mass flow rates of the air and water. On solving

                                                                            #         h1    h4
                                                                           ma         hi    he

                                                                            #
                                                                           m

The solution to Example 8.2 gives h1  2758 kJ/kg and h4  183.36 kJ/kg. From Table A-22, hi  1491.44 kJ/kg and he 
843.98 kJ/kg. Hence

                                                      #       2758  183.36                    3.977      kg 1air2
                                                     ma      1491.44  843.98                            kg 1steam2

                                                      #
                                                     m

From     Example      8.2,   #      4.449    105  kg/h.      Thus,   #       17.694         105  kg/h.
                            m                                       ma

(a) The net rate at which exergy is carried into the heat exchanger unit by the gaseous stream can be evaluated using Eq. 7.36

                                                net rate at which exergy                   #
                                                                                          ma
                                             Ł    is carried in by the             §          1  efi    efe2

                                                       gaseous stream

                                                                                       m# ahi  he  T01si  se2

Since the gas pressure remains constant, Eq. 6.21a giving the change in specific entropy of an ideal gas reduces to si  se 
si  se. Thus, with h and s values from Table A-22

          #   1  efi    efe2        117.694     105  kg/h2 11491.44             843.982     kJ/kg           1295     K2 13.34474    2.745042  kJ/kg    #  K
         ma

                                    8.326  108 kJ/h       `  1 MW       `   231.28 MW
                                        3600 s/ h            103 kJ/s
362 Chapter 8 Vapor Power Systems

  (b) The net rate at which exergy is carried out of the boiler by the water stream is determined similarly

                                           net rate at which exergy                      #
                                                                                        m
                                        Ł     is carried out by the               §         1e  f1    ef42

                                                 water stream

                                                                                         #  h1        h4    T01s1      s42
                                                                                        m

  From Table A-3, s1  5.7432 kJ/kg # K. Double interpolation in Table A-5 at 8.0 MPa and h4  183.36 kJ/kg gives s4 
  0.5957 kJ/kg # K. Substituting known values

                             #  1ef1    ef42     14.449          105212758               183.362          29515.7432         0.59572
                            m

                                               4.699  108 kJ/h                 `  1 MW      `        130.53     MW
                                                     3600 s / h                   103 kJ/s

  (c) The rate of exergy destruction can be evaluated by reducing the exergy rate balance to obtain

                                                        #        m# a1efi         efe2      m# 1ef4       ef12
                                                        Ed

  With the results of parts (a) and (b)

                                              #

                                              Ed  231.28 MW  130.53 MW  100.75 MW

  (d) The exergetic efficiency given by Eq. 7.45 is

                                                  #  1  ef1      ef42      130.53 MW                  0.564     156.4 % 2
                                                 m               efe2      231.28 MW

                                           e     m# a1efi

      This calculation indicates that 43.6% of the exergy supplied to the heat exchanger unit by the cooling combustion prod-
  ucts is destroyed. However, since only 69% of the exergy entering the plant with the fuel is assumed to remain after the stack
  loss and combustion exergy destruction are accounted for (assumption 5), it can be concluded that 0.69  43.6%  30% of
  the exergy entering the plant with the fuel is destroyed within the heat exchanger. This is the value listed in Table 8.1.

   Since energy is conserved, the rate at which energy is transferred to the water as it flows through the heat exchanger equals

    the rate at which energy is transferred from the cooling gas passing through the heat exchanger. By contrast, the decrease

    in exergy of the gas as it passes through the heat exchanger exceeds the increase in the exergy of the water by the amount

    of exergy destroyed.

    The rate of exergy destruction can be determined alternatively by                           evaluating      the  rate  of  entropy  production,   #    from  an
                                                                           #              #                                                          scv,
                                                                           Ed            scv.
    entropy  rate  balance  and  multiplying     by     T0   to  obtain              T0

   Underlying the assumption that each stream passes through the heat exchanger at constant pressure is the neglect of fric-

    tion as an irreversibility. Thus, the only contributor to exergy destruction in this case is heat transfer from the higher-

    temperature combustion products to the vaporizing water.

                                  In the next example, we determine the exergy destruction rates in the turbine and pump
                               of the case study vapor power plant.

  E X A M P L E 8 . 8 Cycle Exergy Analysis--Turbine and Pump

  Reconsider the turbine and pump of Example 8.2. Determine for each of these components the rate at which exergy is de-
  stroyed, in MW. Express each result as a percentage of the exergy entering the plant with the fuel. Let T0  22C, p0  1 atm.

  SOLUTION
  Known: A vapor power cycle operates with steam as the working fluid. The turbine and pump each has an isentropic effi-
  ciency of 85%.
  Find: For the turbine and the pump individually, determine the rate at which exergy is destroyed, in MW. Express each result
  as a percentage of the exergy entering the plant with the fuel.
                                                                   8.6 Case Study: Exergy Accounting of a Vapor Power Plant 363

Schematic and Given Data:

      Boiler               p1 =                         ·
                                                       Wt
 ·                         8.0 MPa
Qin
                                          Turbine

                               1

                           Saturated                                    T
                                                   2
                           vapor

                               Condenser                                                       8.0 MPa

                                                           Q· out                                       1

                                                                                  4

                            Pump                        Cooling               4s
                                                        water                           0.008 MPa
               4
                                 W· p         3 Saturated                         3                     2s 2
                                                  liquid at
                                                  0.008 MPa                                                                 s
                                                                                                                                     Figure E8.8

Assumptions:

1. The turbine and the pump can each be analyzed as a control volume at steady state.
2. The turbine and pump operate adiabatically and each has an efficiency of 85%.
3. Kinetic and potential energy effects are negligible.
4. Only 69% of the exergy entering the plant with the fuel remains after accounting for the stack loss and combustion exergy
destruction.
5. T0  22C, p0  1 atm.

Analysis: The rate of exergy destruction can be found by reducing the exergy rate balance or by use of the relationship
#         #            #
Ed    T0 scv,  where  scv  is  the  rate  of  entropy  production  from    an     entropy     rate  balance.  With  either  approach,  the  rate  of  ex-

ergy destruction for the turbine can be expressed as

                                                           #        #      1  s2     s12
                                                           Ed      mT0

From Table A-3, s1  5.7432 kJ/kg # K. Using h2  1939.3 kJ/kg from the solution to Example 8.2, the value of s2 can be
determined from Table A-3 as s2  6.2021 kJ/kg # K. Substituting values

                                       #
                                      Ed  14.449  105 kg/h2 1295 K2 16.2021  5.74322 1kJ/ kg # K2

                                           a0.602  108 kJ b ` 1 h `               1 MW          16.72 MW
                                                               h 3600 s          ` 103 kJ/s `

    From the solution to Example 8.7, the net rate at which exergy is supplied by the cooling combustion gases is 231.28 MW.

The turbine rate of exergy destruction expressed as a percentage of this is (16.72231.28)(100%)  7.23%. However, since

only 69% of the entering fuel exergy remains after the stack loss and combustion exergy destruction are accounted for, it can

be concluded that 0.69  7.23%  5% of the exergy entering the plant with the fuel is destroyed within the turbine. This is

the value listed in Table 8.1.

    Similarly, the exergy destruction rate for the pump is

                                                           #        #      1  s4     s32
                                                           Ed      mT0

With s3 from Table A-3 and s4 from the solution to Example 8.7
                                       #
                                      Ed  14.449  105 kg/h2 1295 K2 10.5957  0.59262 1kJ/kg # K2

                                           a4.07  105 kJ b ` 1 h `            `  1 MW      `    0.11 MW
                                                              h 3600 s           103 kJ/s
364 Chapter 8 Vapor Power Systems

    Expressing this as a percentage of the exergy entering the plant as calculated above, we have (0.11231.28)(69%)  0.03%.
    This value is rounded to zero in Table 8.1.

        The net power output of the vapor power plant of Example 8.2 is 100 MW. Expressing this as a percentage of the rate at
    which exergy is carried into the plant with the fuel, (100231.28)(69%)  30%, as shown in Table 8.1.

                             The following example illustrates the exergy analysis of the condenser of the case study
                          vapor power plant.

E X A M P L E 8 . 9 Cycle Exergy Analysis--Condenser

The condenser of Example 8.2 involves two separate water streams. In one stream a two-phase liquid­vapor mixture enters
at 0.008 MPa and exits as a saturated liquid at 0.008 MPa. In the other stream, cooling water enters at 15C and exits at 35C.
(a) Determine the net rate at which exergy is carried from the condenser by the cooling water, in MW. Express this result as
a percentage of the exergy entering the plant with the fuel. (b) Determine for the condenser the rate of exergy destruction, in
MW. Express this result as a percentage of the exergy entering the plant with the fuel. Let T0  22C and p0  1 atm.

SOLUTION

Known: A condenser at steady state has two streams: (1) a two-phase liquid­vapor mixture entering and condensate exiting
at known states and (2) a separate cooling water stream entering and exiting at known temperatures.

Find: Determine the net rate at which exergy is carried from the condenser by the cooling water stream and the rate of ex-
ergy destruction for the condenser. Express both quantities in MW and as percentages of the exergy entering the plant with
the fuel.

Schematic and Given Data:

Saturated  3                 2                            Two-phase

liquid,                                                   liquid-vapor mixture,

0.008 MPa                                                 0.008 MPa

                       i     e
Liquid,                                   Liquid,

15°C                                                      35°C

                                                                                  Figure E8.9

Assumptions:
                                                                                                              ##

1. The control volume shown on the accompanying figure operates at steady state with Qcv  Wcv  0.
2. Kinetic and potential energy effects can be ignored.
3. Only 69% of the fuel exergy remains after accounting for the stack loss and combustion exergy destruction.
4. T0  22C, p0  1 atm.

Analysis:

(a) The net rate at which exergy is carried out of the condenser can be evaluated by using Eq. 7.36:

                             net rate at which exergy        #
                                                            mcw
                          Ł  is carried out by the     §         1  efe    efi2

                             cooling water

                                                           m# cwhe  hi  T01se  si2
                                                                                                     Chapter Summary and Study Guide 365

         #
where mcw is the mass flow rate of the cooling water from the solution to Example 8.2. With saturated liquid values for spe-
cific enthalpy and entropy from Table A-2 at the specified inlet and exit temperatures of the cooling water

               #   1  efe    efi2    19.39    106  kg/h2 1146.68         62.992  kJ/kg        1295   K2 10.5053    0.22452  kJ/kg  #  K
              mcw

                                      8.019  106 kJ/h 1 MW
                                    3600 s/h ` 103 kJ/s `  2.23 MW

 Expressing this as a percentage of the exergy entering the plant with the fuel, we get (2.23231.28)(69%)  1%. This is the

     value listed in Table 8.1.

(b) The rate of exergy destruction for the condenser can be evaluated by reducing the exergy rate balance. Alternatively, the
              #          #                                 #
relationship  Ed      T0scv  can   be  employed,   where  scv  is  the  time  rate  of  entropy  production  for  the  condenser  determined  from

an entropy rate balance. With either approach, the rate of exergy destruction can be expressed as

                                                   #        T0m# 1s3      s22       m# cw1se    si2
                                                   Ed

Substituting values

                             #
                             Ed  29514.449  1052 10.5926  6.20212  19.39  1062 10.5053  0.22452

                                     416.1  105 kJ/h   `  1 MW      `    11.56 MW
                                         3600 s/h         103 kJ/s

Expressing this as a percentage of the exergy entering the plant with the fuel, we get (11.56231.28)(69%)  3%. This is the
value listed in Table 8.1.

 The cycle thermal efficiency evaluated in the solution to Example 8.2 is 31.4%. Thus, it can be concluded that over two-

    thirds (68.6%) of the energy supplied by the cooling combustion gas to the cycle working fluid is subsequently carried out

    by the condenser cooling water. However, the amount of exergy carried out with the cooling water is relatively minor be-

    cause the temperature of the water is raised only a few degrees over that of the surroundings.

Chapter Summary and Study Guide

In this chapter we have considered practical arrangements for                     related concepts. The subset of key concepts listed below
vapor power plants producing a net power output from a fos-                       is particularly important.
sil fuel, nuclear, or solar input. We have illustrated how vapor
power plants are modeled thermodynamically and considered                       sketch schematic diagrams and accompanying T­s dia-
the principal irreversibilities and losses associated with such                   grams of Rankine, reheat, and regenerative vapor power
plants. The main components of simple vapor power plants                          cycles.
are modeled by the Rankine cycle. In this chapter, we also
have introduced modifications to the simple vapor power cycle                   apply conservation of mass and energy, the second law,
aimed at improving overall performance. These include su-                         and property data to determine power cycle performance,
perheat, reheat, regeneration, supercritical operation, cogen-                    including thermal efficiency, net power output, and mass
eration, and binary cycles. We have also included a case study                    flow rates.
to illustrate the application of exergy analysis to vapor power
plants.                                                                         discuss the effects on Rankine cycle performance of
                                                                                  varying steam generator pressure, condenser pressure,
   The following checklist provides a study guide for this                        and turbine inlet temperature.
chapter. When your study of the text and end-of-chapter ex-
ercises has been completed you should be able to                                discuss the principal sources of exergy destruction and
                                                                                  loss in vapor power plants.

 write out the meanings of the terms listed in the margin
   throughout the chapter and understand each of the
366 Chapter 8 Vapor Power Systems

Key Engineering Concepts

Rankine cycle p. 327       back work ratio p. 329                    reheat p. 340        cogeneration p. 357
thermal efficiency p. 328  superheat p. 340                          regeneration p. 346

Exercises: Things Engineers Think About

1. Do you know what kinds of power plants (coal-fired, hydro-        plant is ultimately rejected to cooling water flowing through the
electric, nuclear, etc.) generate the electricity provided by your   condenser. Is the heat rejected an indicator of the inefficiency of
local utility company?                                               the power plant?

2. Referring to your monthly electric bill, determine how much       8. Brainstorm some ways to use the cooling water exiting the
you pay per kW # h of electricity.                                   condenser of a large power plant.

3. Might the thermal efficiency of a vapor power plant be            9. What effects on a river's ecology might result from a power
different in the winter than in the summer?                          plant's use of river water for condenser cooling?

4. Power plants located in arid areas may accomplish condensa-       10. Referring to Fig. 8.1, what environmental impacts might
tion by air cooling instead of cooling with water flowing through    result from the two plumes shown on the figure?
the condenser. How might air cooling affect the thermal
efficiency?                                                          11. Referring to Example 8.5, what are the principal sources of
                                                                     internal irreversibility?
5. Is the Carnot vapor power cycle a suitable model for the sim-
ple vapor power plant?                                               12. Why is water the most commonly used working fluid in vapor
                                                                     power plants?
6. Keeping states 1 and 2 fixed, how would Fig. 8.6 be modified
if the frictional pressure drops through the boiler and condenser    13. What do you think about using solar energy to generate
were considered?                                                     electric power?

7. Based on thermal efficiency, approximately two-thirds of the
energy input by heat transfer in the steam generator of a power

Problems: Developing Engineering Skills

Analyzing Rankine Cycles                                                (a) the thermal efficiency.
                                                                        (b) the back work ratio.
8.1 Water is the working fluid in an ideal Rankine cycle. The           (c) the heat transfer to the working fluid per unit mass pass-
   condenser pressure is 8 kPa, and saturated vapor enters the tur-
   bine at (a) 18 MPa and (b) 4 MPa. The net power output of                ing through the boiler, in kJ/kg.
   the cycle is 100 MW. Determine for each case the mass flow           (d) the heat transfer from the working fluid per unit mass pass-
   rate of steam, in kg /h, the heat transfer rates for the working
   fluid passing through the boiler and condenser, each in kW,               ing through the condenser, in kJ/kg.
   and the thermal efficiency.                                          (e) Compare the results of parts (a)­(d), with the correspon-

8.2 Water is the working fluid in an ideal Rankine cycle. Su-               ding values of Example 8.1, and comment.
   perheated vapor enters the turbine at 8 MPa, 480C. The con-
   denser pressure is 8 kPa. The net power output of the cycle is    8.4 Plot each of the quantities calculated in Problem 8.2 versus
   100 MW. Determine for the cycle                                      condenser pressure ranging from 6 kPa to 0.1 MPa. Discuss.

   (a) the rate of heat transfer to the working fluid passing        8.5 Plot each of the quantities calculated in Problem 8.2 versus
        through the steam generator, in kW.                             steam generator pressure ranging from 4 MPa to 24 MPa.
                                                                        Maintain the turbine inlet temperature at 480C. Discuss.
   (b) the thermal efficiency.
   (c) the mass flow rate of condenser cooling water, in kg/h, if    8.6 Water is the working fluid in an ideal Rankine cycle. Sat-
                                                                        urated vapor enters the turbine at 18 MPa. The condenser pres-
       the cooling water enters the condenser at 15C and exits          sure is 6 kPa. Determine
       at 35C with negligible pressure change.
                                                                        (a) the net work per unit mass of steam flowing, in kJ/kg.
8.3 Water is the working fluid in a Carnot vapor power cycle.           (b) the heat transfer to the steam passing through the boiler,
   Saturated liquid enters the boiler at a pressure of 8 MPa, and
   saturated vapor enters the turbine. The condenser pressure is             in kJ per kg of steam flowing.
   8 kPa. Determine                                                     (c) the thermal efficiency.
                                                                        (d) the heat transfer to cooling water passing through the con-

                                                                             denser, in kJ per kg of steam condensed.
                                                                      Problems: Developing Engineering Skills 367

8.7 Water is the working fluid in a Carnot vapor power cycle.            (a) 90%, (b) 80%, (c) 70%. Answer the same questions for the
   Saturated liquid enters the boiler at a pressure of 18 MPa, and       modified cycle as in Problem 8.8.
   saturated vapor enters the turbine. The condenser pressure is
   6 kPa. Determine                                                   8.15 Superheated steam at 8 MPa and 480C leaves the steam
                                                                         generator of a vapor power plant. Heat transfer and frictional
   (a) the thermal efficiency.                                           effects in the line connecting the steam generator and the tur-
   (b) the back work ratio.                                              bine reduce the pressure and temperature at the turbine inlet
   (c) the net work of the cycle per unit mass of water flowing,         to 7.6 MPa and 440C, respectively. The pressure at the exit
                                                                         of the turbine is 10 kPa, and the turbine operates adiabatically.
       in kJ/kg.                                                         Liquid leaves the condenser at 8 kPa, 36C. The pressure is in-
   (d) the heat transfer from the working fluid passing through          creased to 8.6 MPa across the pump. The turbine and pump
                                                                         isentropic efficiencies are 88%. The mass flow rate of steam
        the condenser, in kJ per kg of steam flowing.                    is 79.53 kg/s. Determine
   (e) Compare the results of parts (a)­(d) with those of Problem
                                                                         (a) the net power output, in kW.
       8.6, respectively, and comment.                                   (b) the thermal efficiency.
                                                                         (c) the rate of heat transfer from the line connecting the steam
8.8 Plot each of the quantities calculated in Problem 8.6 versus
   turbine inlet temperature ranging from the saturation temper-             generator and the turbine, in kW.
   ature at 18 MPa to 560C. Discuss.                                     (d) the mass flow rate of condenser cooling water, in kg/s, if

8.9 A power plant based on the Rankine cycle is under                         the cooling water enters at 15C and exits at 35C with
   development to provide a net power output of 10 MW. Solar                  negligible pressure change.
   collectors are to be used to generate Refrigerant 22 vapor at
   1.6 MPa, 50C, for expansion through the turbine. Cooling           8.16 Superheated steam at 18 MPa, 560C, enters the turbine
   water is available at 20C. Specify the preliminary design of          of a vapor power plant. The pressure at the exit of the turbine
   the cycle and estimate the thermal efficiency and the refriger-       is 0.06 bar, and liquid leaves the condenser at 0.045 bar, 26C.
   ant and cooling water flow rates, in kg/h.                            The pressure is increased to 18.2 MPa across the pump. The
                                                                         turbine and pump have isentropic efficiencies of 82 and 77%,
8.10 Refrigerant 134a is the working fluid in a solar power plant        respectively. For the cycle, determine
   operating on a Rankine cycle. Saturated vapor at 60C enters
   the turbine, and the condenser operates at a pressure of 6 bar.       (a) the net work per unit mass of steam flow, in kJ/kg.
   The rate of energy input to the collectors from solar radiation       (b) the heat transfer to steam passing through the boiler, in kJ
   is 0.4 kW per m2 of collector surface area. Determine the min-
   imum possible solar collector surface area, in m2, per kW of               per kg of steam flowing.
   power developed by the plant.                                         (c) the thermal efficiency.
                                                                         (d) the heat transfer to cooling water passing through the con-
8.11 The cycle of Problem 8.3 is modified to include the ef-
   fects of irreversibilities in the adiabatic expansion and com-             denser, in kJ per kg of steam condensed.
   pression processes. If the states at the turbine and pump inlets
   remain unchanged, repeat parts (a)­(d) of Problem 8.3 for the      8.17 In the preliminary design of a power plant, water is chosen
   modified Carnot cycle with t  0.80 and p  0.70.                       as the working fluid and it is determined that the turbine inlet
                                                                         temperature may not exceed 520C. Based on expected cool-
8.12 Steam enters the turbine of a simple vapor power plant              ing water temperatures, the condenser is to operate at a pres-
   with a pressure of 10 MPa and temperature T, and expands              sure of 0.06 bar. Determine the steam generator pressure
   adiabatically to 6 kPa. The isentropic turbine efficiency is 85%.     required if the isentropic turbine efficiency is 80% and the
   Saturated liquid exits the condenser at 6 kPa and the isentropic      quality of steam at the turbine exit must be at least 90%.
   pump efficiency is 82%.
                                                                      Considering Reheat and Supercritical Cycles
   (a) For T  580C, determine the turbine exit quality and the
        cycle thermal efficiency.                                     8.18 Steam at 10 MPa, 600C enters the first-stage turbine of
                                                                         an ideal Rankine cycle with reheat. The steam leaving the
   (b) Plot the quantities of part (a) versus T ranging from 580         reheat section of the steam generator is at 500C, and the con-
        to 700C.                                                         denser pressure is 6 kPa. If the quality at the exit of the second-
                                                                         stage turbine is 90%, determine the cycle thermal efficiency.
8.13 Reconsider the analysis of Problem 8.2, but include in the
   analysis that the turbine and pump have isentropic efficiencies    8.19 The ideal Rankine cycle of Problem 8.2 is modified to in-
   of 85 and 70%, respectively. Determine for the modified cycle         clude reheat. In the modified cycle, steam expands though the
                                                                         first-stage turbine to 0.7 MPa and then is reheated to 480C.
   (a) the thermal efficiency.                                           If the net power output of the modified cycle is 100 MW,
   (b) the mass flow rate of steam, in kg/h, for a net power out-        determine for the modified cycle

        put of 100 MW.                                                   (a) the rate of heat transfer to the working fluid passing
   (c) the mass flow rate of condenser cooling water, in kg/h, if             through the steam generator, in MW.

       the cooling water enters the condenser at 15C and exits           (b) the thermal efficiency.
       at 35C with negligible pressure change.                           (c) the rate of heat transfer to cooling water passing through

8.14 Reconsider Problem 8.8, but include in the analysis that                the condenser, in MW.
   the turbine and pump each have isentropic efficiencies of
368 Chapter 8 Vapor Power Systems

8.20 For the cycle of Problem 8.19, investigate the effects on          8.28 For the cycle of Problem 8.25, investigate the effects on cy-
   cycle performance as the reheat pressure and final reheat tem-          cle performance as the feedwater heater pressure takes on other
   perature take on other values. Construct suitable plots and dis-        values. Construct suitable plots and discuss. Assume that each
   cuss. Reconsider the analysis assuming that the pump and each           turbine stage and each pump has an isentropic efficiency of 80%.
   turbine stage has an isentropic efficiency of 80%.
                                                                        8.29 Modify the ideal Rankine cycle of Problem 8.6 to include
8.21 Steam at 32 MPa, 520C enters the first stage of a super-              superheated vapor entering the first turbine stage at 18 MPa,
   critical reheat cycle including three turbine stages. Steam ex-         560C, and one open feedwater heater operating at 1 MPa. Sat-
   iting the first-stage turbine at pressure p is reheated at constant     urated liquid exits the open feedwater heater at 1 MPa. Deter-
   pressure to 440C, and steam exiting the second-stage turbine            mine for the modified cycle
   at 0.5 MPa is reheated at constant pressure to 360C. Each tur-
   bine stage and the pump has an isentropic efficiency of 85%.            (a) the net work, in kJ per kg of steam entering the first tur-
   The condenser pressure is 8 kPa.                                             bine stage.

   (a) For p  4 MPa, determine the net work per unit mass of               (b) the thermal efficiency.
        steam flowing, in kJ/kg, and the thermal efficiency.               (c) the heat transfer to cooling water passing through the con-

   (b) Plot the quantities of part (a) versus p ranging from 0.5 to            denser, in kJ per kg of steam entering the first turbine stage.
        10 MPa.
                                                                        8.30 Reconsider the cycle of Problem 8.29, but include in the
8.22 An ideal Rankine cycle with reheat uses water as the work-            analysis that each turbine stage and pump has an isentropic
   ing fluid. The conditions at the inlet to the first-stage turbine       efficiency of 85%.
   are 14 MPa, 600C and the steam is reheated between the
   turbine stages to 600C. For a condenser pressure of 6 kPa,           8.31 Modify the ideal Rankine cycle of Problem 8.2 to include
   plot the cycle thermal efficiency versus reheat pressure for            one closed feedwater heater using extracted steam at 0.7 MPa.
   pressures ranging from 2 to 12 MPa.                                     Condensate drains from the feedwater heater as saturated liquid
                                                                           at 0.7 MPa and is trapped into the condenser. The feedwater
Analyzing Regenerative Cycles                                              leaves the heater at 8 MPa and a temperature equal to the satu-
                                                                           ration temperature at 0.7 MPa. Answer the same questions about
8.23 Modify the ideal Rankine cycle of Problem 8.2 to include              the modified cycle as in Problem 8.2 and discuss the results.
   one open feedwater heater operating at 0.7 MPa. Saturated liq-
   uid exits the feedwater heater at 0.7 MPa. Answer the same           8.32 For the cycle of Problem 8.31, investigate the effects on cy-
   questions about the modified cycle as in Problem 8.2 and                cle performance as the extraction pressure takes on other values.
   discuss the results.                                                    Assume that condensate drains from the closed feedwater heater
                                                                           as saturated liquid at the extraction pressure. Also, feedwater
8.24 For the cycle of Problem 8.23, investigate the effects on             leaves the heater at 8 MPa and a temperature equal to the satu-
   cycle performance as the feedwater heater pressure takes on             ration temperature at the extraction pressure. Construct suitable
   other values. Construct suitable plots and discuss. Reconsider          plots and discuss. Reconsider the analysis assuming that each
   the analysis assuming that each turbine stage and each pump             turbine stage and the pump has an isentropic efficiency of 80%.
   has an isentropic efficiency of 80%.
                                                                        8.33 A power plant operates on a regenerative vapor power cycle
8.25 A power plant operates on a regenerative vapor power cy-              with one closed feedwater heater. Steam enters the first turbine
   cle with one open feedwater heater. Steam enters the first tur-         stage at 120 bar, 520C and expands to 10 bar, where some of
   bine stage at 12 MPa, 520C and expands to 1 MPa, where                  the steam is extracted and diverted to a closed feedwater heater.
   some of the steam is extracted and diverted to the open feed-           Condensate exiting the feedwater heater as saturated liquid at
   water heater operating at 1 MPa. The remaining steam expands            10 bar passes through a trap into the condenser. The feedwater
   through the second turbine stage to the condenser pressure of           exits the heater at 120 bar with a temperature of 170C. The
   6 kPa. Saturated liquid exits the open feedwater heater at              condenser pressure is 0.06 bar. For isentropic processes in each
   1 MPa. For isentropic processes in the turbines and pumps, de-          turbine stage and the pump, determine for the cycle (a) the
   termine for the cycle (a) the thermal efficiency and (b) the            thermal efficiency and (b) the mass flow rate into the first-stage
   mass flow rate into the first turbine stage, in kg/h, for a net         turbine, in kg/h, if the net power developed is 320 MW.
   power output of 330 MW.
                                                                        8.34 Reconsider the cycle of Problem 8.33, but include in the
8.26 Reconsider the cycle of Problem 8.25 as the feedwater                 analysis that each turbine stage has an isentropic efficiency of
   heater pressure takes on other values. Plot the thermal effi-           82%. The pump efficiency remains 100%.
   ciency and the rate of exergy destruction within the feedwater
   heater, in kW, versus the feedwater heater pressure ranging          8.35 Modify the cycle of Problem 8.31 such that the saturated
   from 0.5 to 10 MPa. Let T0  293 K.                                      liquid condensate from the feedwater heater at 0.7 MPa is
                                                                           pumped into the feedwater line rather than being trapped into
8.27 Compare the results of Problem 8.25 with those for an                 the condenser. Answer the same questions about the modified
   ideal Rankine cycle having the same turbine inlet conditions            cycle as in Problem 8.31. List advantages and disadvantages
   and condenser pressure, but no regenerator.                             of each scheme for removing condensate from the closed feed-
                                                                           water heater.

                                                                        8.36 Modify the ideal Rankine cycle of Problem 8.6 to include
                                                                           superheated vapor entering the first turbine stage at 18 MPa,
                                                                        Problems: Developing Engineering Skills 369

   560C, and one closed feedwater heater using extracted steam             fed into an open feedwater heater operating at that pressure.
   at 1 MPa. Condensate drains from the feedwater heater as sat-           Saturated liquid at 0.15 MPa leaves the open feedwater heater.
   urated liquid at 1 MPa and is trapped into the condenser. The           For isentropic processes in the pumps and turbines, determine
   feedwater leaves the heater at 18 MPa and a temperature equal           for the cycle (a) the thermal efficiency and (b) the mass flow
   to the saturation temperature at 1 MPa. Determine for the               rate into the first-stage turbine, in kg/h, if the net power
   modified cycle.                                                         developed is 320 MW.

   (a) the net work, in kJ per kg of steam entering the first tur-      8.42 Reconsider the cycle of Problem 8.41, but include in the
        bine stage.                                                        analysis that each turbine stage has an isentropic efficiency of
                                                                           82% and each pump an efficiency of 100%.
   (b) the thermal efficiency.
   (c) the heat transfer to cooling water passing through the con-      8.43 Modify the ideal Rankine cycle of Problem 8.6 to include
                                                                           superheated vapor entering the first turbine stage at 18 MPa,
       denser, in kJ per kg of steam entering the first turbine stage.     560C, and two feedwater heaters. One closed feedwater heater
                                                                           uses extracted steam at 4 MPa, and one open feedwater heater
8.37 Reconsider the cycle of Problem 8.36, but include in the              operates with extracted steam at 0.3 MPa. Saturated liquid con-
   analysis that the isentropic efficiencies of the turbine stages         densate drains from the closed heater at 4 MPa and is trapped
   and the pump are 85%.                                                   into the open heater. The feedwater leaves the closed heater at
                                                                           18 MPa and a temperature equal to the saturation temperature
8.38 Referring to Fig. 8.12, if the fractions of the total flow en-        at 4 MPa. Saturated liquid leaves the open heater at 0.3 MPa.
   tering the first turbine stage (state 1) extracted at states 2, 3,      Determine for the modified cycle
   6, and 7 are y2, y3, y6, and y7, respectively, what are the frac-
   tions of the total flow at states 8, 11, and 17?                        (a) the net work, in kJ per kg of steam entering the first turbine
                                                                                stage.
8.39 Consider a regenerative vapor power cycle with two feed-
   water heaters, a closed one and an open one. Steam enters the           (b) the thermal efficiency.
   first turbine stage at 8 MPa, 480C, and expands to 2 MPa.               (c) the heat transfer to cooling water passing through the con-
   Some steam is extracted at 2 MPa and fed to the closed feed-
   water heater. The remainder expands through the second-stage                denser, in kJ per kg of steam entering the first turbine stage.
   turbine to 0.3 MPa, where an additional amount is extracted
   and fed into the open feedwater heater, which operates at            8.44 Reconsider the cycle of Problem 8.43, but include in the
   0.3 MPa. The steam expanding through the third-stage turbine            analysis that the isentropic efficiencies of the turbine stages
   exits at the condenser pressure of 8 kPa. Feedwater leaves the          and pumps are 85%.
   closed heater at 205C, 8 MPa, and condensate exiting as
   saturated liquid at 2 MPa is trapped into the open heater.           8.45 Modify the regenerative vapor power cycle in Problem
   Saturated liquid at 0.3 MPa leaves the open feedwater heater.           8.39 to include reheat at 2 MPa. The portion of the flow that
   The net power output of the cycle is 100 MW. If the turbine             passes through the second turbine stage is reheated to 440C
   stages and pumps are isentropic, determine                              before it enters the second turbine stage. Determine the ther-
                                                                           mal efficiency of the modified cycle.
   (a) the thermal efficiency.
   (b) the mass flow rate of steam entering the first turbine, in       8.46 Reconsider the cycle of Problem 8.45, but include in the
                                                                           analysis that each turbine stage has an isentropic efficiency of
        kg/h.                                                              85% and each pump an efficiency of 82%.

8.40 For the cycle of Problem 8.39, investigate the effects on          8.47 Steam enters the first turbine stage of a vapor power cy-
   cycle performance as the higher extraction pressure takes on            cle with reheat and regeneration at 32 MPa, 600C, and ex-
   other values. The operating conditions for the open feedwater           pands to 8 MPa. A portion of the flow is diverted to a closed
   heater are unchanged from those in Problem 8.39. Assume that            feedwater heater at 8 MPa, and the remainder is reheated to
   condensate drains from the closed feedwater heater as satu-             560C before entering the second turbine stage. Expansion
   rated liquid at the higher extraction pressure. Also, feedwater         through the second turbine stage occurs to 1 MPa, where an-
   leaves the heater at 8 MPa and a temperature equal to the sat-          other portion of the flow is diverted to a second closed feed-
   uration temperature at the extraction pressure. Construct suit-         water heater at 1 MPa. The remainder of the flow expands
   able plots and discuss. Reconsider the analysis assuming that           through the third turbine stage to 0.15 MPa, where a portion
   each turbine stage and the pump has an isentropic efficiency            of the flow is diverted to an open feedwater heater operating
   of 80%.                                                                 at 0.15 MPa, and the rest expands through the fourth turbine
                                                                           stage to the condenser pressure of 6 kPa. Condensate leaves
8.41 A power plant operates on a regenerative vapor power                  each closed feedwater heater as saturated liquid at the respec-
   cycle with two feedwater heaters. Steam enters the first tur-           tive extraction pressure. The feedwater streams leave each
   bine stage as 12 MPa, 520C and expands in three stages to               closed feedwater heater at a temperature equal to the satura-
   the condenser pressure of 6 kPa. Between the first and sec-             tion temperature at the respective extraction pressure. The con-
   ond stages, some steam is diverted to a closed feedwater                densate streams from the closed heaters each pass through traps
   heater at 1 MPa, with saturated liquid condenstate being                into the next lower-pressure feedwater heater. Saturated liquid
   pumped ahead into the boiler feedwater line. The feedwater              exiting the open heater is pumped to the steam generator
   leaves the closed heater at 12 MPa, 170C. Steam is extracted
   between the second and third turbine stages at 0.15 MPa and
370 Chapter 8 Vapor Power Systems

   pressure. If each turbine stage has an isentropic efficiency of       (c) the rate of heat transfer to the working fluid passing
   85% and the pumps operate isentropically                                  through the steam generator, in kJ/ h.

   (a) sketch the layout of the cycle and number the principal        8.51 Figure P8.51 shows the schematic diagram of a cogen-
        state points.                                                    eration cycle. In the steam cycle, superheated vapor enters
                                                                         the turbine with a mass flow rate of 5 kg/s at 40 bar, 440C
   (b) determine the thermal efficiency of the cycle.                    and expands isentropically to 1.5 bar. Half of the flow is ex-
   (c) calculate the mass flow rate into the first turbine stage, in     tracted at 1.5 bar and used for industrial process heating. The
                                                                         rest of the steam passes through a heat exchanger, which
       kg/h, for a net power output of 500 MW.                           serves as the boiler of the Refrigerant 134a cycle and the
                                                                         condenser of the steam cycle. The condensate leaves the heat
Considering Other Vapor Cycle Aspects                                    exchanger as saturated liquid at 1 bar, where it is combined
                                                                         with the return flow from the process, at 60C and 1 bar, be-
8.48 A binary vapor power cycle consists of two ideal Rankine            fore being pumped isentropically to the steam generator
   cycles with steam and ammonia as the working fluids. In the           pressure. The Refrigerant 134a cycle is an ideal Rankine cy-
   steam cycle, superheated vapor enters the turbine at 6 MPa,           cle with refrigerant entering the turbine at 16 bar, 100C and
   640C, and saturated liquid exits the condenser at 60C. The            saturated liquid leaving the condenser at 9 bar. Determine,
   heat rejected from the steam cycle is provided to the ammo-           in kW,
   nia cycle, producing saturated vapor at 50C, which enters the
   ammonia turbine. Saturated liquid leaves the ammonia con-             (a) the rate of heat transfer to the working fluid passing
   denser at 1 MPa. For a net power output of 20 MW from the                  through the steam generator of the steam cycle.
   binary cycle, determine
                                                                         (b) the net power output of the binary cycle.
   (a) the power output of the steam and ammonia turbines,               (c) the rate of heat transfer to the industrial process.
        respectively, in MW.
                                                                       ·  in    Steam
   (b) the rate of heat addition to the binary cycle, in MW.          Q
   (c) the thermal efficiency.
                                                                                generator
8.49 Water is the working fluid in a cogeneration cycle that gen-
   erates electricity and provides heat for campus buildings.                        1                         W· t1
   Steam at 2 MPa, 320C, enters a two-stage turbine with a mass                              Turbine
   flow rate of 0.82 kg/s. A fraction of the total flow, 0.141, is
   extracted between the two stages at 0.15 MPa to provide for                         H2O cycle                 1.5 bar
   building heating, and the remainder expands through the sec-                                       2
   ond stage to the condenser pressure of 0.06 bar. Condensate
   returns from the campus buildings at 0.1 MPa, 60C and passes                                                      To industrial
   through a trap into the condenser, where it is reunited with the
   main feedwater flow. Saturated liquid leaves the condenser at                                                        process
   0.06 bar. Each turbine stage has an isentropic efficiency of
   80%, and the pumping process can be considered isentropic.             H2O/R-134a
   Determine                                                                   heat

   (a) the rate of heat transfer to the working fluid passing             exchanger           a                                     ·
        through the steam generator, in kJ / h.
                                                                                                      Turbine         Wt2
   (b) the net power developed, in kJ / h.
   (c) the rate of heat transfer for building heating, in kJ/h.       5                           Refrigerant  b
   (d) the rate of heat transfer to the cooling water passing                                                         ·
                                                                                                  cycle              Q out
        through the condenser, in kJ / h.
                                                                          Pump             3      R-134a         Condenser
8.50 Consider a cogeneration system operating as illustrated in                                   cycle        c
   Fig. 8.14. The steam generator provides a 106 kg / h of steam                4
   at 8 MPa, 480C, of which 4  105 kg / h is extracted between                                    d
   the first and second turbine stages at 1 MPa and diverted to a                                     Pump
   process heating load. Condensate returns from the process
   heating load at 0.95 MPa, 120C and is mixed with liquid ex-         ·               6
   iting the lower-pressure pump at 0.95 MPa. The entire flow is      Wp1
   then pumped to the steam generator pressure. Saturated liquid              Return flow from            ·
   at 8 kPa leaves the condenser. The turbine stages and the pumps                                       Wp2
   operate with isentropic efficiencies of 86 and 80%, respec-                industrial process
   tively. Determine
                                                                                1 bar, 60°C
   (a) the heating load, in kJ / h.
   (b) the power developed by the turbine, in kW.                      Figure P8.51

                                                                      Vapor Cycle Exergy Analysis

                                                                      8.52 The steam generator of a vapor power plant can be con-
                                                                         sidered for simplicity to consist of a combustor unit in which
Design & Open Ended Problems: Exploring Engineering Practice 371

   fuel and air are burned to produce hot combustion gases, fol-      8.54 Determine the rate of exergy input, in MW, to the work-
   lowed by a heat exchanger unit where the cycle working fluid          ing fluid passing through the steam generator in Problem 8.47.
   is vaporized and superheated as the hot gases cool. Consider          Perform calculations to account for all outputs, losses, and de-
   water as the working fluid undergoing the cycle of Problem            structions of this exergy. Let T0  15C, p0  1 bar.
   8.13. Hot combustion gases, which are assumed to have the
   properties of air, enter the heat exchanger portion of the steam   8.55 Determine the rate of exergy transfer, in MW, to the work-
   generator at 1200 K and exit at 500 K with a negligible change        ing fluid passing through the steam generator in Problem 8.31.
   in pressure. Determine for the heat exchanger unit                    Perform calculations to account for all outputs, losses, and de-
                                                                         structions of this exergy. Let T0  15C, p0  0.1 MPa.
   (a) the net rate at which exergy is carried in by the gas stream,
        in kW.                                                        8.56 Steam enters the turbine of a vapor power plant at 100 bar,
                                                                         520C and expands adiabatically, exiting at 0.08 bar with a
   (b) the net rate at which exergy is carried out by the water          quality of 90%. Condensate leaves the condenser as saturated
        stream, in kW.                                                   liquid at 0.08 bar. Liquid exits the pump at 100 bar, 43C. The
                                                                         specific exergy of the fuel entering the combustor unit of the
   (c) the rate of exergy destruction, in kW.                            steam generator is estimated to be 14,700 kJ/kg. No exergy is
   (d) the exergetic efficiency given by Eq. 7.45.                       carried in by the combustion air. The exergy of the stack gases
                                                                         leaving the steam generator is estimated to be 150 kJ per kg
   Let T0  15C, p0  0.1 MPa.                                             of fuel. The mass flow rate of the steam is 3.92 kg per kg of
                                                                         fuel. Cooling water enters the condenser at T0  20C, p0 
8.53 Determine the rate of exergy input, in MW, to the work-             1 atm and exits at 35C, 1 atm. Develop a full accounting of
   ing fluid passing through the steam generator in Problem 8.13.        the exergy entering the plant with the fuel.
   Perform calculations to account for all outputs, losses, and de-
   structions of this exergy. Let T0  15C, p0  0.1 MPa.

Design & Open Ended Problems: Exploring Engineering Practice

8.1D Vast quantities of water circulate through the condensers        8.4D Sunlight can be converted directly into electrical output
   of large power plants, exiting at temperatures 10 to 15C above        by photovoltaic cells. These cells have been used for auxiliary
   the ambient temperature. What possible uses could be made of          power generation in spaceflight applications as well as for ter-
   the condenser cooling water? Does this warm water represent           restrial applications in remote areas. Investigate the principle
   a significant resource? What environmental concerns are as-           of operation of photovoltaic cells for electric power genera-
   sociated with cooling water? Discuss.                                 tion. What efficiencies are achieved by present designs, and
                                                                         how are the efficiencies defined? What is the potential for more
8.2D Early commercial vapor power plants operated with tur-              widespread use of this technology? Summarize your findings
   bine inlet conditions of about 12 bar and 200C. Plants are            in a memorandum.
   under development today that can operate at over 34 MPa, with
   turbine inlet temperatures of 650C or higher. How have steam       8.5D One way for power plants to meet peak demands is to use
   generator and turbine designs changed over the years to allow         excess generation capacity during off-peak hours to produce
   for such increases in pressure and temperature? Discuss.              ice, which can then be used as a low-temperature reservoir for
                                                                         condenser heat rejection during peak demand periods. Criti-
8.3D Among the options for meeting future power needs are                cally evaluate this concept for improved power plant utiliza-
   the use of biomass as a fuel and nuclear power. As assigned           tion and write a report of your findings.
   by your instructor, complete one of the following:
                                                                      8.6D Many hospitals, industrial facilities, college campuses,
   (a) Consider the feasibility of using biomass to fuel a 500-MW        and towns employ cogeneration plants that provide district
       electric power plant. Write a report discussing the advan-        heating/cooling and generate electricity. Sketch the main com-
       tages and disadvantages of biomass in comparison to               ponents and layout of such an existing cogeneration system in
       conventional fossil fuels for power plants. Include in your       your locale. Determine the heating and cooling loads served
       analysis plant operations, environmental issues, and costs.       by the system and its electrical generating capacity. Estimate
                                                                         the cost savings observed through the use of cogeneration com-
   (b) Many nuclear power plants are nearing the end of their            pared to meeting these loads individually. Discuss.
        useful lives, and the construction of new nuclear
        power plants is unlikely for the foreseeable future. What     8.7D A significant supply of geothermal hot water at 12 bar,
        challenges are presented by the existing nuclear power           180C exists at a particular location. Develop the preliminary
        plants as they age? What are the options for repowering          design of a 10-MW electric power plant using flash evaporation
        existing plants? What concepts are under investigation for       to provide steam to the turbine-generator. Propose a way to dis-
        future nuclear power plant technology? Will nuclear power        pose of the excess water and spent brine from the flashing
        play a significant role in the United States in the future?      process.
        Write a paper discussing these issues.
372 Chapter 8 Vapor Power Systems                                                    ·
                                                                                    W
8.8D Figure P8.8D shows a thermosyphon Rankine power plant
   having one end immersed in a solar pond and the other ex-                                     Ambient air
   posed to the ambient air. At the lower end, a working fluid is
   vaporized by heat transfer from the hot water of the solar pond.  Condensate              ·
   The vapor flows upward through an axial-flow turbine to the       downpipe               Qout
   upper end, where condensation occurs by heat transfer to the                            Condensate
   ambient air. The condensate drains to the lower end by grav-                            formation
   ity. Evaluate the feasibility of producing power in the 0.1­0.25
   kW range using such a device. What working fluids would be                              Insulation
   suitable? Write a report of your findings.
                                                                                    Vapor
8.9D Cleaner is Better (see box Sec. 8.2). Write a report
   discussing the state-of-the-art of (a) fluidized bed combustion,
   (b) IGCC plants. Include at least three references.

                                                                                           Solar pond

                                                                                                Working fluid
                                                                                                    Q· in

                                                                                    Vapor formation

                                                                      Figure P8.8D
Gas Power                    C
Systems                      H
                             A
                             P
                             T

                             9 E

                             R

E N G I N E E R I N G C O N T E X T The vapor power systems studied in                             chapter objective
Chap. 8 use working fluids that are alternately vaporized and condensed. The objective of
the present chapter is to study power systems utilizing working fluids that are always a gas.
Included in this group are gas turbines and internal combustion engines of the spark-ignition
and compression-ignition types. In the first part of the chapter, internal combustion engines
are considered. Gas turbine power plants are discussed in the second part of the chapter. The
chapter concludes with a brief study of compressible flow in nozzles and diffusers, which are
components in gas turbines for aircraft propulsion and other devices of practical importance.

INTERNAL COMBUSTION ENGINES

This part of the chapter deals with internal combustion engines. Although most gas turbines       spark-ignition
are also internal combustion engines, the name is usually applied to reciprocating internal com-  compression-ignition
bustion engines of the type commonly used in automobiles, trucks, and buses. These engines
differ from the power plants considered in Chap. 8 because the processes occur within recip-
rocating piston­cylinder arrangements and not in interconnected series of different components.

   Two principal types of reciprocating internal combustion engines are the spark-ignition
engine and the compression-ignition engine. In a spark-ignition engine, a mixture of fuel
and air is ignited by a spark plug. In a compression-ignition engine, air is compressed to a
high enough pressure and temperature that combustion occurs spontaneously when fuel is
injected. Spark-ignition engines have advantages for applications requiring power up to about
225 kW. Because they are relatively light and lower in cost, spark-ignition engines are par-
ticularly suited for use in automobiles. Compression-ignition engines are normally preferred
for applications when fuel economy and relatively large amounts of power are required (heavy
trucks and buses, locomotives and ships, auxiliary power units). In the middle range, spark-
ignition and compression-ignition engines are used.

9.1 Introducing Engine Terminology

Figure 9.1 is a sketch of a reciprocating internal combustion engine consisting of a piston that
moves within a cylinder fitted with two valves. The sketch is labeled with some special terms.
The bore of the cylinder is its diameter. The stroke is the distance the piston moves in one

                                                                                                                                                                      373
374 Chapter 9 Gas Power Systems

                                                  Spark plug or             p
                                                  fuel injector

                                                        Valve

                   Top                                           Clearance                                                             X
                                                                 volume                                                             X
                   dead center                    Bore
                                                                 Cylinder                              Power
                   Stroke                                        wall
                                                                                      X
                       Bottom                           Piston                 Exhaust   Compression                                      Exhaust valve
                   dead center Reciprocating                                   valve                                                      opens
                                                                               closes
                                          motion                                                                                           Intake valve
                                                                                         Exhaust                                           closes

                                                                                         Intake

                              Crank mechanism                                  Top dead                   Bottom
                                                                               center                     dead center
                                                                  Rotary
                                                                  motion                          Volume
                    Figure 9.1 Nomenclature for reciprocating
                   piston­cylinder engines.                                  Figure 9.2 Pressure­volume diagram for
                                                                            a reciprocating internal combustion engine.

compression ratio  direction. The piston is said to be at top dead center when it has moved to a position where
                   the cylinder volume is a minimum. This minimum volume is known as the clearance volume.
                   When the piston has moved to the position of maximum cylinder volume, the piston is at
                   bottom dead center. The volume swept out by the piston as it moves from the top dead center
                   to the bottom dead center position is called the displacement volume. The compression ratio
                   r is defined as the volume at bottom dead center divided by the volume at top dead center.
                   The reciprocating motion of the piston is converted to rotary motion by a crank mechanism.

                      In a four-stroke internal combustion engine, the piston executes four distinct strokes within
                   the cylinder for every two revolutions of the crankshaft. Figure 9.2 gives a pressure­volume
                   diagram such as might be displayed electronically.

                   1. With the intake valve open, the piston makes an intake stroke to draw a fresh charge
                      into the cylinder. For spark-ignition engines, the charge is a combustible mixture of fuel
                      and air. Air alone is the charge in compression-ignition engines.

                   2. With both valves closed, the piston undergoes a compression stroke, raising the
                      temperature and pressure of the charge. This requires work input from the piston to the
                      cylinder contents. A combustion process is then initiated, resulting in a high-pressure,
                      high-temperature gas mixture. Combustion is induced near the end of the compression
                      stroke in spark-ignition engines by the spark plug. In compression-ignition engines,
                      combustion is initiated by injecting fuel into the hot compressed air, beginning near the
                      end of the compression stroke and continuing through the first part of the expansion.

                   3. A power stroke follows the compression stroke, during which the gas mixture expands
                      and work is done on the piston as it returns to bottom dead center.

                   4. The piston then executes an exhaust stroke in which the burned gases are purged from
                      the cylinder through the open exhaust valve.

                   Smaller engines operate on two-stroke cycles. In two-stroke engines, the intake, compression,
                   expansion, and exhaust operations are accomplished in one revolution of the crankshaft.
                   Although internal combustion engines undergo mechanical cycles, the cylinder contents
                                                                                                                          9.2 Air-Standard Otto Cycle 375

do not execute a thermodynamic cycle, for matter is introduced with one composition and is
later discharged at a different composition.

   A parameter used to describe the performance of reciprocating piston engines is the mean
effective pressure, or mep. The mean effective pressure is the theoretical constant pressure
that, if it acted on the piston during the power stroke, would produce the same net work as
actually developed in one cycle. That is

         net work for one cycle  (9.1) mean effective pressure
mep 

          displacement volume

For two engines of equal displacement volume, the one with a higher mean effective pressure
would produce the greater net work and, if the engines run at the same speed, greater power.

AIR-STANDARD ANALYSIS. A detailed study of the performance of a reciprocating internal               air-standard analysis:
combustion engine would take into account many features. These would include the combustion          internal combustion
process occurring within the cylinder and the effects of irreversibilities associated with friction  engines
and with pressure and temperature gradients. Heat transfer between the gases in the cylinder and
the cylinder walls and the work required to charge the cylinder and exhaust the products of com-
bustion also would be considered. Owing to these complexities, accurate modeling of recipro-
cating internal combustion engines normally involves computer simulation. To conduct element-
ary thermodynamic analyses of internal combustion engines, considerable simplification is
required. One procedure is to employ an air-standard analysis having the following elements:

 A fixed amount of air modeled as an ideal gas is the working fluid.

 The combustion process is replaced by a heat transfer from an external source.

 There are no exhaust and intake processes as in an actual engine. The cycle is com-
   pleted by a constant-volume heat transfer process taking place while the piston is at the
   bottom dead center position.

 All processes are internally reversible.

In addition, in a cold air-standard analysis, the specific heats are assumed constant at their       cold air-standard analysis
ambient temperature values. With an air-standard analysis, we avoid dealing with the com-
plexities of the combustion process and the change of composition during combustion. A
comprehensive analysis requires that such complexities be considered, however. For a
discussion of combustion, see Chap. 13.

   Although an air-standard analysis simplifies the study of internal combustion engines con-
siderably, values for the mean effective pressure and operating temperatures and pressures
calculated on this basis may depart significantly from those of actual engines. Accordingly,
air-standard analysis allows internal combustion engines to be examined only qualitatively.
Still, insights concerning actual performance can result with such an approach.

   In the remainder of this part of the chapter, we consider three cycles that adhere to air-
standard cycle idealizations: the Otto, Diesel, and dual cycles. These cycles differ from each
other only in the way the heat addition process that replaces combustion in the actual cycle
is modeled.

9.2 Air-Standard Otto Cycle                                                                          Otto cycle

The air-standard Otto cycle is an ideal cycle that assumes the heat addition occurs instanta-
neously while the piston is at top dead center. The Otto cycle is shown on the p­v and T­s
376 Chapter 9 Gas Power Systems

                             p                      T
                                 3                                                  3

                             2                        2              v=c 3
                                   s=c
                                        s=c              2                  4
                              a                  4
                                                 1             v=c

                                               bv        1

                                                                                          Figure 9.3 p­v and T­s diagrams of
                                                                            a s the air-standard Otto cycle.
                                                            b

                             diagrams of Fig. 9.3. The cycle consists of four internally reversible processes in series:

                              Process 1­2 is an isentropic compression of the air as the piston moves from bottom
                                dead center to top dead center.

                              Process 2­3 is a constant-volume heat transfer to the air from an external source while
                                the piston is at top dead center. This process is intended to represent the ignition of the
                                fuel­air mixture and the subsequent rapid burning.

                              Process 3­ 4 is an isentropic expansion (power stroke).

                              Process 4­1 completes the cycle by a constant-volume process in which heat is rejected
                                from the air while the piston is at bottom dead center.

                                Since the air-standard Otto cycle is composed of internally reversible processes, areas on
                             the T­s and p­v diagrams of Fig. 9.3 can be interpreted as heat and work, respectively. On
                             the T­s diagram, area 2­3­a­b­2 represents the heat added per unit of mass and area
                             1­4­a­b­1 the heat rejected per unit of mass. On the p­v diagram, area 1­2­a­b­1 repre-
                             sents the work input per unit of mass during the compression process and area 3­4­b­a­3
                             is the work done per unit of mass in the expansion process. The enclosed area of each fig-
                             ure can be interpreted as the net work output or, equivalently, the net heat added.

                             CYCLE ANALYSIS. The air-standard Otto cycle consists of two processes in which there is
                             work but no heat transfer, Processes 1­2 and 3­4, and two processes in which there is heat
                             transfer but no work, Processes 2­3 and 4­1. Expressions for these energy transfers are
                             obtained by reducing the closed system energy balance assuming that changes in kinetic and
                             potential energy can be ignored. The results are

                                                    W12        u2    u1,       W34            u3    u4
                                                     m                          m
                                                                                                              (9.2)
                                                    Q23
                                                    m          u3    u2,       Q41            u4    u1
                                                                               m

METHODOLOGY                  Carefully note that in writing Eqs. 9.2, we have departed from our usual sign convention for
UPDATE
                             heat and work. Thus, W12m is a positive number representing the work input during com-
When analyzing air-          pression and Q41m is a positive number representing the heat rejected in Process 4 ­1. The
standard cycles, it is       net work of the cycle is expressed as
frequently convenient to
regard all work and heat                Wcycle           W34        W12     1u3          u42      1u2    u12
transfers as positive quan-               m               m          m
tities and write the energy
balance accordingly.         Alternatively, the net work can be evaluated as the net heat added

                                        Wcycle           Q23        Q41     1u3          u22      1u4    u12
                                          m              m          m
                                                                                          9.2 Air-Standard Otto Cycle 377

which, on rearrangement, can be placed in the same form as the previous expression for net
work.

   The thermal efficiency is the ratio of the net work of the cycle to the heat added.

                              1u3     u22           1u4         u12    1        u4    u1  (9.3)
                                       u3           u2                          u3    u2
                  h

   When air table data are used to conduct an analysis involving an air-standard Otto cycle,
the specific internal energy values required by Eq. 9.3 can be obtained from Table A-22 or
A-22E as appropriate. The following relationships based on Eq. 6.44 apply for the isentropic
processes 1­2 and 3­4

                                      vr 2          vr1  a V2 b        vr1                (9.4)
                                                          V1           r

                                      vr 4          vr3  a  V4  b      r vr3              (9.5)
                                                            V3

where r denotes the compression ratio. Note that since V3  V2 and V4  V1, r  V1V2 
V4V3. The parameter vr is tabulated versus temperature for air in Tables A-22.

   When the Otto cycle is analyzed on a cold air-standard basis, the following expressions

based on Eq. 6.46 would be used for the isentropic processes in place of Eqs. 9.4 and 9.5,

respectively

                     T2               V1    k    1

                     T1            a  V2  b              rk1           1constant k2       (9.6)

                     T4               V3    k    1        1
                     T3                                  rk1
                                   a  V4  b                            1constant k2       (9.7)

where k is the specific heat ratio, k  cpcv.

EFFECT OF COMPRESSION RATIO ON PERFORMANCE. By referring to the T­s diagram
of Fig. 9.3, we can conclude that the Otto cycle thermal efficiency increases as the
compression ratio increases. An increase in the compression ratio changes the cycle from
1­2­3­4­1 to 1­2­3­4­1. Since the average temperature of heat addition is greater in the
latter cycle and both cycles have the same heat rejection process, cycle 1­2­3­4­1 would
have the greater thermal efficiency. The increase in thermal efficiency with compression ratio
is also brought out simply by the following development on a cold air-standard basis. For
constant cv, Eq. 9.3 becomes

                                      h          1       cv1T4         T12
                                                         cv1T3         T22

On rearrangement

                                   h        1       T1      a  T4  T1       1
                                                    T2         T3  T2        b

                                                                            1

From Eqs. 9.6 and 9.7 above, T4T1  T3T2, so

                                                 h  1  T1
                                                             T2

Finally, introducing Eq. 9.6

                              h       1           1                1constant k2           (9.8)
                                                 r k1
      378 Chapter 9 Gas Power Systems

      Thermodynamics in the News...

      End of Cheap Oil in View, Experts Say                                    Critical shortages, but not
                                                                           higher prices, may be avoided by
      Nature needed 500 million years to create the world's stock of       expensive methods of squeezing
      readily accessible oil, but some observers predict we will con-      more oil out of existing wells.
      sume most of what's left within the next 50 years. Still, the im-    Also, unconventional petroleum
      portant issue, they say, is not when the world runs out of oil, but  resources locked in oil shale and
      when production will peak. After that, production must decline,      tar sands could be tapped. Al-
      and unless demand is reduced, oil prices will rise. This will end    though vast in extent, the costs
      the era of cheap oil we enjoy and pose challenges for society.       of extracting these resources
                                                                           would be great. Extensive envi-
          The rate any well can produce oil typically rises to a max-      ronmental damage may result,
      imum and then, when about half the oil has been pumped out,          including the effects of air emis-
      begins to fall as the remaining oil becomes increasingly diffi-      sions, liquid effluents, and vast
      cult to extract. Using this model for the world oil supply as a      amounts of spent shale and sand that would remain after oil
      whole, economists predict a peak in oil production by 2020,          has been removed.
      or even as soon as 2010. That will lead to shortages and higher
      prices at the pump, which will have global economic and po-
      litical repercussions.

 (%)   70                           Equation 9.8 indicates that the cold air-standard Otto cycle thermal efficiency is a function
       60                           of compression ratio and k. This relationship is shown in Fig. 9.4 for k  1.4, representing
       50                           ambient air.
       40
       30                              The foregoing discussion suggests that it is advantageous for internal combustion en-
       20                           gines to have high compression ratios, and this is the case. The possibility of autoignition,
       10                           or "knock," places an upper limit on the compression ratio of spark-ignition engines, how-
                                    ever. After the spark has ignited a portion of the fuel­air mixture, the rise in pressure ac-
        00 2 4 6 8 10               companying combustion compresses the remaining charge. Autoignition can occur if the
              Compression ratio, r  temperature of the unburned mixture becomes too high before the mixture is consumed by
                                    the flame front. Since the temperature attained by the air­fuel mixture during the com-
     Figure 9.4 Thermal             pression stroke increases as the compression ratio increases, the likelihood of autoignition
    efficiency of the cold air-     occurring increases with the compression ratio. Autoignition may result in high-pressure
    standard Otto cycle, k          waves in the cylinder (manifested by a knocking or pinging sound) that can lead to loss
    1.4.                            of power as well as engine damage. Fuels formulated with tetraethyl lead are resistant to
                                    autoignition and thus allow relatively high compression ratios. The unleaded gasoline in
                                    common use today because of environmental concerns over air pollution limits the com-
                                    pression ratios of spark-ignition engines to approximately 9. Higher compression ratios
                                    can be achieved in compression-ignition engines because air alone is compressed. Com-
                                    pression ratios in the range of 12 to 20 are typical. Compression-ignition engines also can
                                    use less refined fuels having higher ignition temperatures than the volatile fuels required
                                    by spark-ignition engines.

                                       In the next example, we illustrate the analysis of the air-standard Otto cycle. Results are
                                    compared with those obtained on a cold air-standard basis.

      E X A M P L E 9 . 1 Analyzing the Otto Cycle

      The temperature at the beginning of the compression process of an air-standard Otto cycle with a compression ratio of 8 is
      300K, the pressure is 1 bar, and the cylinder volume is 560 cm3. The maximum temperature during the cycle is 2000K.
      Determine (a) the temperature and pressure at the end of each process of the cycle, (b) the thermal efficiency, and (c) the
      mean effective pressure, in atm.
                                                                                                       9.2 Air-Standard Otto Cycle 379

SOLUTION

Known: An air-standard Otto cycle with a given value of compression ratio is executed with specified conditions at the
beginning of the compression stroke and a specified maximum temperature during the cycle.

Find: Determine the temperature and pressure at the end of each process, the thermal efficiency, and mean effective pressure,
in atm.

Schematic and Given Data:

p          3                                     T
                                                                                     3
               T3 = 2000°                                                                   T3 = 2000°

                  s=c                                                    v=c            4
               s=c
    2                                                          2
   ­VV­21 = 8
                           4                                               v=c

                           1                                   1         T1 = 300°
                                     v
                                                                                                       s
                                                                                                                 Figure E9.1

Assumptions:

1. The air in the piston­cylinder assembly is the closed system.
2. The compression and expansion processes are adiabatic.
3. All processes are internally reversible.
4. The air is modeled as an ideal gas.
5. Kinetic and potential energy effects are negligible.

Analysis:

(a) The analysis begins by determining the temperature, pressure, and specific internal energy at each principal state of the
cycle. At T1  300 K, Table A-22 gives u1  214.07 kJ/kg and vr1  621.2.

    For the isentropic compression Process 1­2

                                        vr2           V2  vr1       vr1    621.2      77.65
                                                      V1             r       8

Interpolating with vr2 in Table A-22, we get T2  673 K and u2  491.2 kJ/kg. With the ideal gas equation of state

                           p2           p1   T2  V1       11   atm2      a 673°Kb  8    17.95    bars
                                             T1  V2                       300°K

The pressure at state 2 can be evaluated alternatively by using the isentropic relationship, p2  p1( pr2pr1).
    Since Process 2­3 occurs at constant volume, the ideal gas equation of state gives

                           p3           p2   T3       117.95      bars2  a2000 Kb          53.3  bars
                                             T2                            673 K

At T3  2000 K, Table A-22 gives u3  1678.7 kJ/kg and vr3  2.776.
    For the isentropic expansion process 3­4

                                        vr4      vr3  V4       vr3  V1     2.776182     22.21
                                                      V3            V2
380 Chapter 9 Gas Power Systems

  Interpolating in Table A-22 with vr4 gives T4  1043 K, u4  795.8 kJ/kg. The pressure at state 4 can be found using the isen-
  tropic relationship p4  p3( pr4pr3) or the ideal gas equation of state applied at states 1 and 4. With V4  V1, the ideal gas

  equation of state gives

                                        p4        p1   T4    11  bar2   a 1043 Kb          3.48    bars
                                                       T1                 300 K

  (b) The thermal efficiency is

                                               h    1      Q41m         1    u4        u1
                                                           Q23m              u3        u2

                                                    1      795.8  214.07               0.51  1 51% 2
                                                           1678.7  491.2

  (c) To evaluate the mean effective pressure requires the net work per cycle. That is

                                                  Wcycle  m 3 1u3  u42  1u2  u12 4

  where m is the mass of the air, evaluated from the ideal gas equation of state as follows:

                                 m      p1V1

                                      1RM2T1

                                        11 bar2 1560 cm32            a   1 m3    b  a 105 N/m2 b      a     1 kJ    b
                                                                        106 cm3         1 bar            103 N #  m
                                      a 8.314    kJ    b   1300  K2
                                       28.97   kg # K

                                     6.5  104 kg

  Inserting values into the expression for Wcycle
                                  Wcycle  16.5  104 kg2 3 11678.7  795.82  1491.2  214.072 4 kJ/kg
                                           0.394 kJ

  The displacement volume is V1  V2, so the mean effective pressure is given by

                                         Wcycle             Wcycle
                                        V1  V2         V111  V2
                                  mep                                   V12

                                                  0.394 kJ           a  106 cm3  b  a  103 N .  m  b  a    1  bar   b
                                                  cm32 11                1 m3             1 kJ           105  N/m2
                                        1560                 182

                                       8.04 bars

   This solution utilizes Table A-22 for air, which accounts explicitly for the variation of the specific heats with tem-

      perature. A solution also can be developed on a cold air-standard basis in which constant specific heats are assumed.
      This solution is left as an exercise, but for comparison the results are presented for the case k  1.4 in the following
      table:

  Parameter  Air-Standard Analysis                                   Cold Air-Standard Analysis,
                                                                                 k  1.4
       T2          673 K
       T3          2000 K                                                    689 K
       T4          1043 K                                                    2000 K
                   0.51 (51%)                                                871 K
      mep          8.04 bars                                                 0.565 (56.5%)
                                                                             7.05 bars
                                                                               9.3 Air-Standard Diesel Cycle 381

9.3 Air-Standard Diesel Cycle                                                                     Diesel cycle

The air-standard Diesel cycle is an ideal cycle that assumes the heat addition occurs during
a constant-pressure process that starts with the piston at top dead center. The Diesel cycle is
shown on p­v and T­s diagrams in Fig. 9.5. The cycle consists of four internally reversible
processes in series. The first process from state 1 to state 2 is the same as in the Otto cycle:
an isentropic compression. Heat is not transferred to the working fluid at constant volume
as in the Otto cycle, however. In the Diesel cycle, heat is transferred to the working fluid at
constant pressure. Process 2­3 also makes up the first part of the power stroke. The isen-
tropic expansion from state 3 to state 4 is the remainder of the power stroke. As in the Otto
cycle, the cycle is completed by constant-volume Process 4­1 in which heat is rejected from
the air while the piston is at bottom dead center. This process replaces the exhaust and intake
processes of the actual engine.

    Since the air-standard Diesel cycle is composed of internally reversible processes, ar-
eas on the T­s and p­v diagrams of Fig. 9.5 can be interpreted as heat and work, respec-
tively. On the T­s diagram, area 2­3­a­b­2 represents the heat added per unit of mass and
area 1­4­a­b­1 is the heat rejected per unit of mass. On the p­v diagram, area 1­2­a­b­1
is the work input per unit of mass during the compression process. Area 2­3­4­b­a­2 is
the work done per unit of mass as the piston moves from top dead center to bottom dead
center. The enclosed area of each figure is the net work output, which equals the net heat
added.

CYCLE ANALYSIS. In the Diesel cycle the heat addition takes place at constant pressure.
Accordingly, Process 2­3 involves both work and heat. The work is given by

                              W23       3                                      (9.9)

                              m          p dv  p21v3  v22

                                       2

The heat added in Process 2­3 can be found by applying the closed system energy balance

                                        m1u3  u22  Q23  W23
Introducing Eq. 9.9 and solving for the heat transfer

         Q23          1u3    u22    p1v3    v22    1u3    pv32    1u2    pv22
         m

               h3  h2                                                          (9.10)

                                                          3

p                                   T

   2  3                                          p=c

                                            2                4

                 s=c                               v=c
      s=c

                      4

                      1                     1                      Figure 9.5 p­v and T­s

                                                                  diagrams of the air-standard

   a                  bv                    b             a s Diesel cycle.
382 Chapter 9 Gas Power Systems

              where the specific enthalpy is introduced to simplify the expression. As in the Otto cycle,
              the heat rejected in Process 4­1 is given by

                                                          Q41             u4         u1
                                                          m

              The thermal efficiency is the ratio of the net work of the cycle to the heat added

                                 h     Wcycle m               1           Q41m             1    u4     u1   (9.11)
                                      Q23 m                               Q23 m                 h3     h2

              As for the Otto cycle, the thermal efficiency of the Diesel cycle increases with the com-
              pression ratio.

                 To evaluate the thermal efficiency from Eq. 9.11 requires values for u1, u4, h2, and h3 or
              equivalently the temperatures at the principal states of the cycle. Let us consider next how
              these temperatures are evaluated. For a given initial temperature T1 and compression ratio r,
              the temperature at state 2 can be found using the following isentropic relationship and vr data

                                                  vr2            V2     vr1          1   vr1
                                                                 V1                  r

              To find T3, note that the ideal gas equation of state reduces with p3  p2 to give

                                                       T3           V3  T2           rcT2
                                                                    V2

cutoff ratio  where rc  V3V2, called the cutoff ratio, has been introduced.
                 Since V4  V1, the volume ratio for the isentropic process 3­ 4 can be expressed as

                                              V4  V4 V2  V1 V2  r                                           (9.12)
                                              V3 V2 V3 V2 V3 rc

              where the compression ratio r and cutoff ratio rc have been introduced for conciseness.
                 Using Eq. 9.12 together with vr3 at T3, the temperature T4 can be determined by interpo-

              lation once vr4 is found from the isentropic relationship

                                                  vr4            V4    vr3           r   vr3
                                                                 V3                  rc

                 In a cold air-standard analysis, the appropriate expression for evaluating T2 is provided
              by

                                    T2           V1    k      1

                                    T1        a  V2  b                 r k1              1constant k2

              The temperature T4 is found similarly from

                                 T4           V3    k     1            rc    k    1

                                 T3        a  V4  b                 a  r   b               1constant k2

              where Eq. 9.12 has been used to replace the volume ratio.

              EFFECT OF COMPRESSION RATIO ON PERFORMANCE. As for the Otto cycle, the ther-
              mal efficiency of the Diesel cycle increases with increasing compression ratio. This can be
              brought out simply using a cold air-standard analysis. On a cold air-standard basis, the ther-
              mal efficiency of the Diesel cycle can be expressed as

                                        1         1        c     r  k      1      d           1constant k2  (9.13)
                                                 r k1               c
                                 h
                                                              k 1rc  12
                                                                                                                  9.3 Air-Standard Diesel Cycle 383

                          70              rc = 1 (Otto cycle)

Thermal efficiency,  (%)  60

                          50                         Diesel

                          40              rc = 2     cycle

                          30           rc = 3

                          20

                          10

                          0   5           10         15                20  Figure 9.6 Thermal efficiency of the cold air-

                                       Compression ratio, r            standard Diesel cycle, k  1.4.

where r is the compression ratio and rc the cutoff ratio. The derivation is left as an exer-
cise. This relationship is shown in Fig. 9.6 for k  1.4. Equation 9.13 for the Diesel cycle
differs from Eq. 9.8 for the Otto cycle only by the term in brackets, which for rc  1 is
greater than unity. Thus, when the compression ratio is the same, the thermal efficiency of

the cold air-standard Diesel cycle would be less than that of the cold air-standard Otto

cycle.

   In the next example, we illustrate the analysis of the air-standard Diesel cycle.

                          E X A M P L E 9 . 2 Analyzing the Diesel Cycle

                          At the beginning of the compression process of an air-standard Diesel cycle operating with a compression ratio of 18, the tem-
                          perature is 300 K and the pressure is 0.1 MPa. The cutoff ratio for the cycle is 2. Determine (a) the temperature and pressure
                          at the end of each process of the cycle, (b) the thermal efficiency, (c) the mean effective pressure, in MPa.

                          SOLUTION
                          Known: An air-standard Diesel cycle is executed with specified conditions at the beginning of the compression stroke. The
                          compression and cutoff ratios are given.
                          Find: Determine the temperature and pressure at the end of each process, the thermal efficiency, and mean effective
                          pressure.
                          Schematic and Given Data:

                          p                                                         T                       3

                                 2                3

                                                     rc =  ­V­3  =  2                     v2
                                                           V2

                                                                                       2  p=c                  4

                                                     s=c

                                 ­V­1  =  18   s=c                     4                               v=c
                                 V2            p1 = 0.1 MPa                            1 T1 = 300 K
                                                                       1
                                                                                 v                                         s
                                                                                                                                    Figure E9.2
384 Chapter 9 Gas Power Systems

  Assumptions:

  1. The air in the piston­cylinder assembly is the closed system.
  2. The compression and expansion processes are adiabatic.
  3. All processes are internally reversible.
  4. The air is modeled as an ideal gas.
  5. Kinetic and potential energy effects are negligible.

  Analysis:

  (a) The analysis begins by determining properties at each principal state of the cycle. With T1  300 K, Table A-22 gives
  u1  214.07 kJ/kg and vr1  621.2. For the isentropic compression process 1­2

                                               vr2      V2  vr1         vr1      621.2        34.51
                                                        V1               r        18

  Interpolating in Table A-22, we get T2  898.3 K and h2  930.98 kJ/kg. With the ideal gas equation of state

                                 p2          p1   T2    V1    10.12     a 898.3 b    1182       5.39  MPa
                                                  T1    V2                300

  The pressure at state 2 can be evaluated alternatively using the isentropic relationship, p2  p1( pr2pr1).
      Since Process 2­3 occurs at constant pressure, the ideal gas equation of state gives

                                                                    T3       V3  T2
                                                                             V2

  Introducing the cutoff ratio, rc  V3V2

                                               T3  rcT2  21898.32  1796.6 K

  From Table A-22, h3  1999.1 kJ/kg and vr3  3.97.
      For the isentropic expansion process 3­4

                                                        vr4       V4    vr3      V4  V2  vr3
                                                                  V3             V2  V3

  Introducing V4  V1, the compression ratio r, and the cutoff ratio rc, we have

                                                  vr4       r           18   13.972      35.73
                                                            rc vr3      2

  Interpolating in Table A-22 with vr4, we get u4  664.3 kJ/kg and T4  887.7 K. The pressure at state 4 can be found using
  the isentropic relationship p4  p3( pr4pr3) or the ideal gas equation of state applied at states 1 and 4. With V4  V1, the ideal

  gas equation of state gives

                                 p4            p1   T4      10.1    MPa2     a887.7 Kb          0.3  MPa
                                                    T1                         300 K

  (b) The thermal efficiency is found using

                                          h    1        Q41m            1    u4      u1
                                                        Q23m                 h3      h2

                                               1        664.3  214.07                0.578      157.8 % 2
                                                        1999.1  930.98

  (c) The mean effective pressure written in terms of specific volumes is

                                                   mep         Wcycle m            Wcycle m
                                                                                 v111  1r2
                                                              v1  v2
                                                                                                               9.4 Air-Standard Dual Cycle 385

The net work of the cycle equals the net heat added

                                       Wcycle    Q23     Q41    1h3      h22           1u4        u12
                                         m       m       m

                                                11999.1  930.982  1664.3  214.072

                                                617.9 kJ/kg

The specific volume at state 1 is

                                                      8314 N # m
                                                      a            # K b 1300       K2
                                         1RM2T1        28.97 kg    N/m2
                                   v1                         105                              0.861   m3/kg
                                            p1

Inserting values

                                   mep            617.9 kJ/kg            ` 103 N #     m    `  `   1 MPa    `
                                                                             1 kJ                 106 N/m2
                                           0.86111  1182 m3/kg

                                          0.76 MPa

 This solution uses the air tables, which account explicitly for the variation of the specific heats with temperature. Note

    that Eq. 9.13 based on the assumption of constant specific heats has not been used to determine the thermal efficiency.

    The cold air-standard solution of this example is left as an exercise.

9.4 Air-Standard Dual Cycle                                                                                    dual cycle

The pressure­volume diagrams of actual internal combustion engines are not described
well by the Otto and Diesel cycles. An air-standard cycle that can be made to approximate
the pressure variations more closely is the air-standard dual cycle. The dual cycle is shown
in Fig. 9.7. As in the Otto and Diesel cycles, Process 1­2 is an isentropic compression.
The heat addition occurs in two steps, however: Process 2­3 is a constant-volume heat ad-
dition; Process 3­ 4 is a constant-pressure heat addition. Process 3­ 4 also makes up the
first part of the power stroke. The isentropic expansion from state 4 to state 5 is the re-
mainder of the power stroke. As in the Otto and Diesel cycles, the cycle is completed by
a constant-volume heat rejection process, Process 5 ­1. Areas on the T­s and p­v diagrams
can be interpreted as heat and work, respectively, as in the cases of the Otto and Diesel
cycles.

p3  4                                    T

2                                                                                4
                                                                    p=c

       s=c                                               3

       s=c                                          v=c
                         5
                                                 2                       5

                                                                  v=c
                  1

                                                 1

                            v                                                       s

 Figure 9.7 p­v and T­s diagrams of the air-standard dual cycle.
386 Chapter 9 Gas Power Systems

CYCLE ANALYSIS. Since the dual cycle is composed of the same types of processes as the
Otto and Diesel cycles, we can simply write down the appropriate work and heat transfer ex-
pressions by reference to the corresponding earlier developments. Thus, during the isentropic
compression process 1­2 there is no heat transfer, and the work is

                                                    W12    u2      u1
                                                     m

As for the corresponding process of the Otto cycle, in the constant-volume portion of the
heat addition process, Process 2­3, there is no work, and the heat transfer is

                                                    Q23    u3      u2
                                                    m

In the constant-pressure portion of the heat addition process, Process 3­4, there is both work
and heat transfer, as for the corresponding process of the Diesel cycle

                                    W34    p 1v4    v32    and          Q34    h4    h3
                                     m                                  m

During the isentropic expansion process 4­5 there is no heat transfer, and the work is

                                                    W45    u4      u5
                                                     m

Finally, the constant-volume heat rejection process 5­1 that completes the cycle involves
heat transfer but no work

                                                    Q51    u5      u1
                                                    m

The thermal efficiency is the ratio of the net work of the cycle to the total heat added

                                 h            Wcycle m          1         Q51m
                                         1Q23m  Q34m2                1Q23m  Q34m2

                                      1    1u3      1u5    u12     h32                   (9.14)
                                                    u22    1h4

   The example to follow provides an illustration of the analysis of an air-standard dual cycle.
The analysis exhibits many of the features found in the Otto and Diesel cycle examples
considered previously.

E X A M P L E 9 . 3 Analyzing the Dual Cycle

At the beginning of the compression process of an air-standard dual cycle with a compression ratio of 18, the temperature is
300 K and the pressure is 0.1 MPa. The pressure ratio for the constant volume part of the heating process is 1.5:1. The vol-
ume ratio for the constant pressure part of the heating process is 1.2:1. Determine (a) the thermal efficiency and (b) the mean
effective pressure, in MPa.

SOLUTION

Known: An air-standard dual cycle is executed in a piston­cylinder assembly. Conditions are known at the beginning of the
compression process, and necessary volume and pressure ratios are specified.

Find: Determine the thermal efficiency and the mep, in MPa.
                                                                                               9.4 Air-Standard Dual Cycle 387

Schematic and Given Data:

p     34

                ­p­3  =  1.5,  ­V­4  =  1.2           T                                        4
                p2             V3                                                     p=c      5

   2                                                               v=c 3                                 s
                                                               2                                                   Figure E9.3
                          s=c
                s=c                                                               v=c

   ­VV­12 = 18                                                  1 T1 = 300 K

                p1 = 0.1 MPa               5

                                        1
                                                 v

Assumptions:

1. The air in the piston­cylinder assembly is the closed system.
2. The compression and expansion processes are adiabatic.
3. All processes are internally reversible.
4. The air is modeled as an ideal gas.
5. Kinetic and potential energy effects are negligible.

Analysis: The analysis begins by determining properties at each principal state of the cycle. States 1 and 2 are the same as
in Example 9.2, so u1  214.07 kJ/kg, T2  898.3 K, u2  673.2 kJ/kg. Since Process 2­3 occurs at constant volume, the
ideal gas equation of state reduces to give

                                             T3       p3  T2    11.52 1898.32       1347.5  K
                                                      p2

Interpolating in Table A-22, we get h3  1452.6 kJ/kg and u3  1065.8 kJ/kg.
    Since Process 3­4 occurs at constant pressure, the ideal gas equation of state reduces to give

                                             T4       V4  T3    1 1.2 2 1 1347.5 2    1617  K
                                                      V3

From Table A-22, h4  1778.3 kJ/kg and vr4  5.609.
    Process 4­5 is an isentropic expansion, so

                                                                vr5    vr4  V5
                                                                            V4

The volume ratio V5V4 required by this equation can be expressed as

                                                                V5  V5 V3
                                                                V4 V3 V4

With V5  V1, V2  V3, and given volume ratios

                                                    V5  V1 V3  18 a 1 b  15
                                                    V4 V2 V4                1.2

Inserting this in the above expression for vr5

                                                      vr5  15.6092 1152  84.135

Interpolating in Table A-22, we get u5  475.96 kJ/kg.
388 Chapter 9 Gas Power Systems

(a) The thermal efficiency is

                               h      1         Q51m              1    1u3    1u5    u12    h32
                                           1Q23m  Q34m2                       u22    1h4

                                                          1475.96  214.072
                                     1  11065.8  673.22  11778.3  1452.62

                                     0.635 163.5% 2

(b) The mean effective pressure is

                                              mep       Wcycle m       Wcycle m
                                                                     v111  1r2
                                                       v1  v2

The net work of the cycle equals the net heat added, so

                                         mep    1u3    u22   1h4     h32    1u5    u12
                                                             v111  
                                                                     1r2

    The specific volume at state 1 is evaluated in Example 9.2 as v1  0.861 m3/kg. Inserting values into the above expres-
sion for mep

      3 11065.8  673.22  11778.3  1452.62  1475.96  214.072 4 a kJ b ` 103 N # m `               `   1 MPa    `
                                                                                       kg 1 kJ      106 N/m2
mep                                                                                                               0.56 MPa
                                                0.86111  1182 m3/kg

air-standard analysis:     GAS TURBINE POWER PLANTS
gas turbines
                        This part of the chapter deals with gas turbine power plants. Gas turbines tend to be lighter
                        and more compact than the vapor power plants studied in Chap. 8. The favorable power-
                        output-to-weight ratio of gas turbines makes them well suited for transportation applications
                        (aircraft propulsion, marine power plants, and so on). Gas turbines are also commonly used
                        for stationary power generation.

                        9.5 Modeling Gas Turbine Power Plants

                        Gas turbine power plants may operate on either an open or closed basis. The open mode pic-
                        tured in Fig. 9.8a is more common. This is an engine in which atmospheric air is continuously
                        drawn into the compressor, where it is compressed to a high pressure. The air then enters a
                        combustion chamber, or combustor, where it is mixed with fuel and combustion occurs, re-
                        sulting in combustion products at an elevated temperature. The combustion products expand
                        through the turbine and are subsequently discharged to the surroundings. Part of the turbine
                        work developed is used to drive the compressor; the remainder is available to generate elec-
                        tricity, to propel a vehicle, or for other purposes. In the system pictured in Fig. 9.8b, the
                        working fluid receives an energy input by heat transfer from an external source, for example
                        a gas-cooled nuclear reactor. The gas exiting the turbine is passed through a heat exchanger,
                        where it is cooled prior to reentering the compressor.

                            An idealization often used in the study of open gas turbine power plants is that of an
                        air-standard analysis. In an air-standard analysis two assumptions are always made:

                         The working fluid is air, which behaves as an ideal gas.

                         The temperature rise that would be brought about by combustion is accomplished by a
                           heat transfer from an external source.
                                                                         9.6 Air-Standard Brayton Cycle 389

                Fuel                                                 ·
                                                                   Qin
            Combustion                                  Heat exchanger
              chamber

Compressor                  Turbine         Compressor                   Turbine
      Air                   Products
                                      Net                                         Net
                                      work                                        work
                                      out                                         out

                                                        Heat exchanger
                                                                     ·
                                                                   Qout

            (a)                                         (b)

 Figure 9.8 Simple gas turbine. (a) Open to the atmosphere. (b) Closed.

With an air-standard analysis, we avoid dealing with the complexities of the combustion
process and the change of composition during combustion. An air-standard analysis simplifies
the study of gas turbine power plants considerably. However, numerical values calculated on
this basis may provide only qualitative indications of power plant performance. Sufficient in-
formation about combustion and the properties of products of combustion is known (Chap. 13)
that the study of gas turbines can be conducted without the foregoing assumptions. Still, we
can learn some important aspects of gas turbine operation by proceeding on the basis of an
air-standard analysis, as follows.

9.6 Air-Standard Brayton Cycle

A schematic diagram of an air-standard gas turbine is shown in Fig. 9.9. The directions of
the principal energy transfers are indicated on this figure by arrows. In accordance with the
assumptions of an air-standard analysis, the temperature rise that would be achieved in the

            Q· in

   2        Heat exchanger  3

                                             ·
                                            Wcycle

Compressor                  Turbine

1           Heat exchanger            4

            Q· out                                   Figure 9.9 Air-standard gas turbine
                                                    cycle.
390 Chapter 9 Gas Power Systems

Brayton cycle  combustion process is brought about by a heat transfer to the working fluid from an exter-
               nal source and the working fluid is considered to be air as an ideal gas. With the air-standard
               idealizations, air would be drawn into the compressor at state 1 from the surroundings and
               later returned to the surroundings at state 4 with a temperature greater than the ambient tem-
               perature. After interacting with the surroundings, each unit mass of discharged air would
               eventually return to the same state as the air entering the compressor, so we may think of
               the air passing through the components of the gas turbine as undergoing a thermodynamic
               cycle. A simplified representation of the states visited by the air in such a cycle can be de-
               vised by regarding the turbine exhaust air as restored to the compressor inlet state by pass-
               ing through a heat exchanger where heat rejection to the surroundings occurs. The cycle that
               results with this further idealization is called the air-standard Brayton cycle.

                9.6.1 Evaluating Principal Work and Heat Transfers

               The following expressions for the work and heat transfers of energy that occur at steady state

               are readily derived by reduction of the control volume mass and energy rate balances. These

               energy transfers are positive in the directions of the arrows in Fig. 9.9. Assuming the turbine

               operates adiabatically and with negligible effects of kinetic and potential energy, the work

               developed per unit of mass is

                                                                #

                                                          Wt           h3    h4                       (9.15)
                                                           #
                                                          m

                        #
               where m denotes the mass flow rate. With the same assumptions, the compressor work per

               unit of mass is

                                                                #

                                                          Wc           h2    h1                       (9.16)
                                                           #
                                                          m

                               #
               The symbol Wc denotes work input and takes on a positive value. The heat added to the cy-

               cle per unit of mass is

                                                             #

                                                          Qin          h3    h2                       (9.17)
                                                           #
                                                          m

               The heat rejected per unit of mass is

                                                          #

                                                          Qout         h4    h1                       (9.18)
                                                            #                                         (9.19)
                                                           m

                        #
               where Qout is positive in value.

               The thermal efficiency of the cycle in Fig. 9.9 is

                                              #  m#    W# cm#          1h3       h42      1h2    h12
                                             Wt                                   h3      h2
                                        h        Q# inm#

               The back work ratio for the cycle is

                                                 bwr               W# cm#    h2       h1              (9.20)
                                                                    #        h3       h4
                                                                   Wt  m#

               For the same pressure rise, a gas turbine compressor would require a much greater work in-

               put per unit of mass flow than the pump of a vapor power plant because the average specific

               volume of the gas flowing through the compressor would be many times greater than that of

               the liquid passing through the pump (see discussion of Eq. 6.53b in Sec. 6.9). Hence, a

               relatively large portion of the work developed by the turbine is required to drive the

               compressor. Typical back work ratios of gas turbines range from 40 to 80%. In comparison,

               the back work ratios of vapor power plants are normally only 1 or 2%.
                                                                                                                     9.6 Air-Standard Brayton Cycle 391

   If the temperatures at the numbered states of the cycle are known, the specific enthalpies
required by the foregoing equations are readily obtained from the ideal gas table for air,
Table A-22. Alternatively, with the sacrifice of some accuracy, the variation of the specific
heats with temperature can be ignored and the specific heats taken as constant. The air-
standard analysis is then referred to as a cold air-standard analysis. As illustrated by the
discussion of internal combustion engines given previously, the chief advantage of the
assumption of constant specific heats is that simple expressions for quantities such as thermal
efficiency can be derived, and these can be used to deduce qualitative indications of cycle
performance without involving tabular data.

   Since Eqs. 9.15 through 9.20 have been developed from mass and energy rate balances,
they apply equally when irreversibilities are present and in the absence of irreversibilities.
Although irreversibilities and losses associated with the various power plant components have
a pronounced effect on overall performance, it is instructive to consider an idealized cycle
in which they are assumed absent. Such a cycle establishes an upper limit on the perform-
ance of the air-standard Brayton cycle. This is considered next.

 9.6.2 Ideal Air-Standard Brayton Cycle

Ignoring irreversibilities as the air circulates through the various components of the Brayton
cycle, there are no frictional pressure drops, and the air flows at constant pressure through
the heat exchangers. If stray heat transfers to the surroundings are also ignored, the processes
through the turbine and compressor are isentropic. The ideal cycle shown on the p­v and T­s
diagrams in Fig. 9.10 adheres to these idealizations.

   Areas on the T­s and p­v diagrams of Fig. 9.10 can be interpreted as heat and work, re-
spectively, per unit of mass flowing. On the T­s diagram, area 2­3­a­b­2 represents the heat
added per unit of mass and area 1­4­a­b­1 is the heat rejected per unit of mass. On the p­v
diagram, area 1­2­a­b­1 represents the compressor work input per unit of mass and area
3­4­b­a­3 is the turbine work output per unit of mass (Sec. 6.9). The enclosed area on each
figure can be interpreted as the net work output or, equivalently, the net heat added.

   When air table data are used to conduct an analysis involving the ideal Brayton cycle,
the following relationships, based on Eq. 6.43, apply for the isentropic processes 1­2
and 3­4

                                            pr2       pr1  p2                 (9.21)
                                                           p1                 (9.22)

                                       pr4    pr3  p4      pr3   p1
                                                   p3            p2

p                                                  T                      3

a  2             3                                                        3

                                                           2

      s=c                                                        p=c      4

                    s=c                                    2         p=c
                                    4
b                                                          1
              1

                                       v                      b           as

 Figure 9.10 Air-standard ideal Brayton cycle.
392 Chapter 9 Gas Power Systems

              Recall that pr is tabulated versus temperature in Tables A-22. Since the air flows through the
              heat exchangers of the ideal cycle at constant pressure, it follows that p4p3  p1p2. This
              relationship has been used in writing Eq. 9.22.

                 When an ideal Brayton cycle is analyzed on a cold air-standard basis, the specific heats

              are taken as constant. Equations 9.21 and 9.22 are then replaced, respectively, by the fol-

              lowing expressions, based on Eq. 6.45

                                                                  p2    1k    12k

                                                  T2        T1 a  p1  b                                       (9.23)
                                                                                                              (9.24)
                                                                  p4    1k    12k          p1      1k    12k

                                                  T4        T3 a  p3  b              T3 a  p2    b

              where k is the specific heat ratio, k  cpcv.
                 In the next example, we illustrate the analysis of an ideal air-standard Brayton cycle and

              compare results with those obtained on a cold air-standard basis.

E X A M P L E 9 . 4 Analyzing the Ideal Brayton Cycle

Air enters the compressor of an ideal air-standard Brayton cycle at 100 kPa, 300 K, with a volumetric flow rate of 5 m3/s.
The compressor pressure ratio is 10. The turbine inlet temperature is 1400 K. Determine (a) the thermal efficiency of the
cycle, (b) the back work ratio, (c) the net power developed, in kW.

SOLUTION
Known: An ideal air-standard Brayton cycle operates with given compressor inlet conditions, given turbine inlet tempera-
ture, and a known compressor pressure ratio.
Find: Determine the thermal efficiency, the back work ratio, and the net power developed, in kW.
Schematic and Given Data:

              ·
              Qin
                                                            T                                         3
                                                                                   T3 = 1400 K
­pp­12 = 10
           2  Heat exchanger         T3 = 1400 K
                                 3
                                                                                   p = 1000 kPa
                                                   ·
                                                  Wcycle

Compressor                       Turbine

                                                                      2                               4
                                                                                   p = 100 kPa

              Heat exchanger

1                                4                                           T1 = 300 K
                                                                      1
p1 = 100 kPa   ·
T1 = 300 K    Qout                                                                                            s
                                                                                                                       Figure E9.4

Assumptions:

1. Each component is analyzed as a control volume at steady state. The control volumes are shown on the accompanying
sketch by dashed lines.
2. The turbine and compressor processes are isentropic.
                                                                                                                          9.6 Air-Standard Brayton Cycle 393

3. There are no pressure drops for flow through the heat exchangers.
4. Kinetic and potential energy effects are negligible.
5. The working fluid is air modeled as an ideal gas.

     Analysis: The analysis begins by determining the specific enthalpy at each numbered state of the cycle. At state 1, the tem-

 perature is 300 K. From Table A-22, h1  300.19 kJ/kg and pr1  1.386.

         Since the compressor process is isentropic, the following relationship can be used to determine h2

                                                         pr2        p2   pr1           1 10 2 1 1.386 2        13.86
                                                                    p1

Then, interpolating in Table A-22, we obtain h2  579.9 kJ/kg.
    The temperature at state 3 is given as T3  1400 K. With this temperature, the specific enthalpy at state 3 from Table A-22

is h3  1515.4 kJ/kg. Also, pr3  450.5.

    The specific enthalpy at state 4 is found by using the isentropic relation

                                                         pr4        pr3  p4         1450.52 11102              45.05
                                                                         p3

Interpolating in Table A-22, we get h4  808.5 kJ/kg.

(a) The thermal efficiency is

                                        #   m# 2      1   #   m# 2
                                      1Wt                Wc

                                 h             #   m#
                                              Qin

                                      1h3     h42        1h2        h12             11515.4       808.52  1579.9                  300.192
                                               h3        h2                                       1515.4  579.9

                                     706.9  279.7  0.457 145.7%2
                                             935.5

     (b) The back work ratio is             bwr           #   m#         h2         h1    279.7             0.396     1 39.6 % 2
                                                         Wc              h3         h4    706.9
                                                          #
                                                         Wt   m#

(c) The net power developed is

                                                          #               #  3  1  h3    h42    1h2            h12 4
                                                         Wcycle          m

                                                                   #
To evaluate the net power requires the mass flow rate m, which can be determined from the volumetric flow rate and specific

volume at the compressor inlet as follows

                                                                                 #      1AV21
                                                                                m
                                                                                          v1

Since v1  1RM2T1p1, this becomes

                                                   #     1AV21p1                   15 m3/s2 1100  103 N/m22
                                                  m
                                                         1RM2T1                     a 8314    N   #      m
                                                                                     28.97    kg  #      K  b  1300   K2

                                                                              5.807 kg/s

Finally,

                                     #        15.807     kg/s2 1706.9                   279.72  a kJ b      `  1 kW    `   2481 kW
                                    Wcycle                                                       kg            1 kJ/s

 The use of the ideal gas table for air is featured in this solution. A solution also can be developed on a cold air-standard

    basis in which constant specific heats are assumed. The details are left as an exercise, but for comparison the results are
394 Chapter 9 Gas Power Systems

     presented for the case k  1.4 in the following table:

     Parameter                  Air-Standard Analysis          Cold Air-Standard Analysis,
                                                                           k  1.4
          T2                           574.1 K
          T4                           787.7 K                            579.2 K
                                       0.457                              725.1 K
         b# wr                         0.396                              0.482
        Wcycle                         2481 kW                            0.414
                                                                          2308 kW

      The value of the back work ratio in the present gas turbine case is significantly greater than the back work ratio of the

         simple vapor power cycle of Example 8.1.

                                EFFECT OF PRESSURE RATIO ON PERFORMANCE. Conclusions that are qualitatively cor-
                                rect for actual gas turbines can be drawn from a study of the ideal Brayton cycle. The first
                                of these conclusions is that the thermal efficiency increases with increasing pressure ratio
                                across the compressor.  for example. . . referring again to the T­s diagram of Fig. 9.10,
                                we see that an increase in the pressure ratio changes the cycle from 1­2­3­4­1 to
                                1­2­3­4­1. Since the average temperature of heat addition is greater in the latter cycle and
                                both cycles have the same heat rejection process, cycle 1­2­3­4­1 would have the greater
                                thermal efficiency. 

                                The increase in thermal efficiency with the pressure ratio across the compressor is also

                                brought out simply by the following development, in which the specific heat cp, and thus the
                                specific heat ratio k, is assumed constant. For constant cp, Eq. 9.19 becomes

                                                            cp1T3   T42  cp1T2            T12    1    1T4    T12
                                                                     cp1T3  T22                       1T3    T22
                                                       h

                                Or, on further rearrangement

                                                                   h    1     T1  a  T4T1        1
                                                                              T2     T3T2         b

                                                                                                 1

60                              From Eqs. 9.23 and 9.24 above, T4T1  T3T2, so

(%)                                                                         h  1  T1
                                                                                        T2

   0                            Finally, introducing Eq. 9.23
    0 2 4 6 8 10
     Compressor pressure ratio                               h  1            1                 1k constant2       (9.25)
                                                                      1 p2  p1 2 1k  12k
 Figure 9.11 Ideal
Brayton cycle thermal           By inspection of Eq. 9.25, it can be seen that the cold air-standard ideal Brayton cycle ther-
efficiency versus com-
pressor pressure ratio,         mal efficiency is a function of the pressure ratio across the compressor. This relationship is
k  1.4.                         shown in Fig. 9.11 for k  1.4.

                                   There is a limit of about 1700 K imposed by metallurgical considerations on the maxi-
                                mum allowed temperature at the turbine inlet. It is instructive therefore to consider the ef-
                                fect of compressor pressure ratio on thermal efficiency when the turbine inlet temperature is
                                restricted to the maximum allowable temperature. The T­s diagrams of two ideal Brayton
                                cycles having the same turbine inlet temperature but different compressor pressure ratios are
                                shown in Fig. 9.12. Cycle A has a greater pressure ratio than cycle B and thus the greater
                                thermal efficiency. However, cycle B has a larger enclosed area and thus the greater net work
                                developed per unit of mass flow. Accordingly, for cycle A to develop the same net power
                                                                                  9.6 Air-Standard Brayton Cycle 395

              Cycle A: 1-2-3-4-1
              larger thermal efficiency

T                                           Turbine inlet
        2
              3                          3 temperature

2                                        4

   1       4 Cycle B: 1-2-3-4-1

                 larger net work per unit of mass flow  Figure 9.12 Ideal Brayton cycles with

                                                            different pressure ratios and the same turbine

                                                            s inlet temperature.

output as cycle B, a larger mass flow rate would be required, and this might dictate a larger
system. These considerations are important for gas turbines intended for use in vehicles where
engine weight must be kept small. For such applications, it is desirable to operate near the
compressor pressure ratio that yields the most work per unit of mass flow and not the pres-
sure ratio for the greatest thermal efficiency.

   Example 9.5 provides an illustration of the determination of the compressor pressure ra-
tio for maximum net work per unit of mass flow for the cold air-standard Brayton cycle.

E X A M P L E 9 . 5 Compressor Pressure Ratio for Maximum Net Work

Determine the pressure ratio across the compressor of an ideal Brayton cycle for the maximum net work output per unit of
mass flow if the state at the compressor inlet and the temperature at the turbine inlet are fixed. Use a cold air-standard analysis
and ignore kinetic and potential energy effects. Discuss.

SOLUTION

Known: An ideal Brayton cycle operates with a specified state at the inlet to the compressor and a specified turbine inlet
temperature.
Find: Determine the pressure ratio across the compressor for the maximum net work output per unit of mass flow, and dis-
cuss the result.
Schematic and Given Data:

   T Turbine inlet

           temperature fixed                3

           ­pp­12 variable                                  Assumptions:
                                                         4  1. Each component is analyzed as a control volume at steady state.
                                                            2. The turbine and compressor processes are isentropic.
           2                                                3. There are no pressure drops for flow through the heat exchangers.
                                                            4. Kinetic and potential energy effects are negligible.
           1 Compressor inlet state fixed                   5. The working fluid is air modeled as an ideal gas.
                                                        s   6. The specific heat cp and the specific heat ratio k are constant.

                                                             Figure E9.5
396 Chapter 9 Gas Power Systems

Analysis:  The net work of the cycle per unit of mass flow is

                                                       #

                                                       Wcycle         1h3       h42           1h2        h12
                                                          #
                                                         m

Since cp is constant (assumption 6)

                                                    #

                                                  Wcycle        cp 3 1T3            T42         1T2           T12 4
                                                     #
                                                    m

Or on rearrangement

                                               #

                                             Wcycle             cpT1     a T3       T4      T3        T2         1b
                                                #                         T1        T3      T1        T1
                                               m

Replacing the temperature ratios T2T1 and T4T3 by using Eqs. 9.23 and 9.24, respectively, gives

                                     #

                                     Wcycle                 T3        T3     p1      1k    12k           p2     1k      12k
                                        #                   T1        T1
                                       m       cpT1 c                     a  p2    b                  a  p1   b                   1d

From this expression it can be concluded that for specified values of T1, T3, and cp, the value of the net work output per unit
of mass flow varies with the pressure ratio p2p1 only.

    To determine the pressure ratio that maximizes the net work output per unit of mass flow, first form the derivative

                        #      m# 2              0                       T3         T3      p1    1k     12k            p2    1k    12k
                                             0 1p2                       T1         T1
                      0 1Wcycle                             e  cpT1   c                  a      b                    a      b              1d  f

                       0 1 p2 p12                      p12                                  p2                          p1

                                                   k           1b  c  a T3 b    a  p1   1k      a    p1    2     a   p2   1k        d
                                             cpT1a        k            T1
                                                                                   p2  b             p2  b           p1  b

                                                   k           1b     a T3 b       p1    12k   12k               p2   1k
                                             cpT1a        k            T1
                                                                   c            a  p2  b                      a  p1  b       d

When the partial derivative is set to zero, the following relationship is obtained

                                                                p2              T3   k   321k   124

                                                                p1           a  T1  b

By checking the sign of the second derivative, we can verify that the net work per unit of mass flow is a maximum when this
relationship is satisfied.

    For gas turbines intended for transportation, it is desirable to keep engine size small. Thus, the gas turbine should operate
near the compressor pressure ratio that yields the most work per unit of mass flow. The present example provides an elementary
illustration of how the compressor pressure ratio for maximum net work per unit of mass flow is affected by the constraint of
a fixed turbine inlet temperature.

                      9.6.3 Considering Gas Turbine Irreversibilities and Losses

                     The principal state points of an air-standard gas turbine might be shown more realisti-
                     cally as in Fig. 9.13a. Because of frictional effects within the compressor and turbine, the
                     working fluid would experience increases in specific entropy across these components.
                     Owing to friction, there also would be pressure drops as the working fluid passes through
                     the heat exchangers. However, because frictional pressure drops are less significant sources
                     of irreversibility, we ignore them in subsequent discussions and for simplicity show the
                     flow through the heat exchangers as occurring at constant pressure. This is illustrated by
                     Fig. 9.13b. Stray heat transfers from the power plant components to the surroundings rep-
                     resent losses, but these effects are usually of secondary importance and are also ignored
                     in subsequent discussions.
                                                                                                 9.6 Air-Standard Brayton Cycle 397

T                             3              T                                      3
                    p=c             4
                                                                      p=c
          2                                                2s 2

                                                                                           4

                         p=c                                                           4s

                                                                               p=c

                                                                   1
1

                        s                                                                     s
(a)                                                                   (b)

 Figure 9.13 Effects of irreversibilities on the air-standard gas turbine.

   As the effect of irreversibilities in the turbine and compressor becomes more pronounced,
the work developed by the turbine decreases and the work input to the compressor increases,
resulting in a marked decrease in the net work of the power plant. Accordingly, if an appre-
ciable amount of net work is to be developed by the plant, relatively high turbine and com-
pressor efficiencies are required. After decades of developmental effort, efficiencies of 80 to
90% can now be achieved for the turbines and compressors in gas turbine power plants. Des-
ignating the states as in Fig. 9.13b, the isentropic turbine and compressor efficiencies are
given by

                                               #  m# 2                h3  h4
                                             1Wt                      h3  h4s
                                       ht      #
                                             1Wt  m# 2
                                                        s
                                             1W# cm# 2s
                                       hc    1W# cm# 2                h2s  h1
                                                                      h2  h1

   The effects of irreversibilities in the turbine and compressor are important. Still, among
the irreversibilities of actual gas turbine power plants, combustion irreversibility is the most
significant by far. An air-standard analysis does not allow this irreversibility to be evaluated,
however, and means introduced in Chap. 13 must be applied. Combustion irreversibility is
also briefly considered in Sec. 9.10.

   Example 9.6 brings out the effect of turbine and compressor irreversibilities on plant
performance.

E X A M P L E 9 . 6 Brayton Cycle with Irreversibilities

Reconsider Example 9.4, but include in the analysis that the turbine and compressor each have an isentropic efficiency of
80%. Determine for the modified cycle (a) the thermal efficiency of the cycle, (b) the back work ratio, (c) the net power de-
veloped, in kW.

SOLUTION
Known: An air-standard Brayton cycle operates with given compressor inlet conditions, given turbine inlet temperature, and
known compressor pressure ratio. The compressor and turbine each have an isentropic efficiency of 80%.
Find: Determine the thermal efficiency, the back work ratio, and the net power developed, in kW.
398 Chapter 9 Gas Power Systems

  Schematic and Given Data:

                                                3
                             T3 = 1400 K
  T

                       p = 1000 kPa                4                   Assumptions:

                    2  p = 100 kPa           4s                        1. Each component is analyzed as a control volume at steady state.
                 2s                                                    2. The compressor and turbine are adiabatic.
                                                                       3. There are no pressure drops for flow through the heat exchangers.
                                                                       4. Kinetic and potential energy effects are negligible.
                                                                       5. The working fluid is air modeled as an ideal gas.

                        T1 = 300 K
                 1

                                                          s
                                                                   Figure E9.6

  Analysis:

  (a) The thermal efficiency is given by

                                                                           1   #  m# 2          #   m# 2
                                                                              Wt              1Wc

                                                                    h                  #   m#
                                                                                      Qin

  The work terms in the numerator of this expression are evaluated using the given values of the compressor and turbine isen-
  tropic efficiencies as follows:

      The turbine work per unit of mass is

                                                                           #               #

                                                                         Wt       ht    a  Wt  b
                                                                          #                 #
                                                                         m                 m     s

  where  t   is  the   turbine  efficiency.  The   value  of    #   m# )s  is   determined          in  the  solution  to  Example  9.4  as  706.9  kJ/kg.  Thus
                                                              (Wt

                                                              #

                                                          Wt           0.81706.92             565.5     kJ/kg
                                                           #
                                                              m

  For the compressor, the work per unit of mass is

                                                                          #             #  m# 2s
                                                                                      1Wc
                                                                         Wc
                                                                          #
                                                                           m
                                                                                          hc

  where c is the compressor efficiency. The value of (W# cm# )s is determined in the solution to Example 9.4 as 279.7 kJ/kg, so

                                                                 #

                                                                 Wc      279.7            349.6     kJ/kg
                                                                  #
                                                                 m 0.8

      The specific enthalpy at the compressor exit, h2, is required to evaluate the denominator of the thermal efficiency expres-
  sion. This enthalpy can be determined by solving

                                                                           #

                                                                         Wc           h2      h1
                                                                          #
                                                                         m

  to obtain

                                                                       h2         h1        #  m#
                                                                                           Wc
                                                                                                   9.7 Regenerative Gas Turbines 399

  Inserting known values

                                              h2  300.19  349.6  649.8 kJ/kg

  The heat transfer to the working fluid per unit of mass flow is then

                                      #

                                      Qin     h3      h2      1515.4     649.8    865.6     kJ/kg
                                       #
                                      m

  where h3 is from the solution to Example 9.4.
      Finally, the thermal efficiency is

                                              h    565.5  349.6          0.249  1 24.9 % 2
                                                        865.6

  (b) The back work ratio is

                                            bwr       W# cm#      349.6    0.618  161.8 % 2
                                                       #          565.5
                                                      Wt  m#

  (c) The mass flow rate is the same as in Example 9.4. The net power developed by the cycle is then

                               #         a5.807    kg     1565.5    349.62  kJ  ` 1 kW `     1254 kW
                              Wcycle                  b                     kg  1 kJ/s

                                                   s

   The solution to this example on a cold air-standard basis is left as an exercise.
   Irreversibilities within the turbine and compressor have a significant impact on the performance of gas turbines. This is

      brought out by comparing the results of the present example with those of Example 9.4. Irreversibilities result in an in-

      crease in the work of compression and a reduction in work output of the turbine. The back work ratio is greatly increased

      and the thermal efficiency significantly decreased.

9.7 Regenerative Gas Turbines
The turbine exhaust temperature of a gas turbine is normally well above the ambient tem-

perature. Accordingly, the hot turbine exhaust gas has a potential for use (exergy) that would

be irrevocably lost were the gas discarded directly to the surroundings. One way of utilizing

this potential is by means of a heat exchanger called a regenerator, which allows the air ex-              regenerator

iting the compressor to be preheated before entering the combustor, thereby reducing the

amount of fuel that must be burned in the combustor. The combined cycle arrangement con-

sidered in Sec. 9.10 is another way to utilize the hot turbine exhaust gas.

  An air-standard Brayton cycle modified to include a regenerator is illustrated in Fig. 9.14.

The regenerator shown is a counterflow heat exchanger through which the hot turbine ex-

haust gas and the cooler air leaving the compressor pass in opposite directions. Ideally, no

frictional pressure drop occurs in either stream. The turbine exhaust gas is cooled from state 4

to state y, while the air exiting the compressor is heated from state 2 to state x. Hence, a heat

transfer from a source external to the cycle is required only to increase the air temperature

from state x to state 3, rather than from state 2 to state 3, as would be the case without

regeneration. The heat added per unit of mass is then given by

                                         #

                                         Qin      h3      hx                                       (9.26)
                                          #
                                         m
400 Chapter 9 Gas Power Systems

y Regenerator

                                                              ·                                                            3
                                                              Qin
                                                                                             T                           4
                                                                                                                 y
                                                     Combustor
                                            x                                                                                 s

                                    2                         3             4

Compressor                                                         Turbine     W· cycle                x
                                                                                                2

                                                                                                1

   1
 Figure 9.14 Regenerative air-standard gas turbine cycle.

The net work developed per unit of mass flow is not altered by the addition of a regenera-
tor. Thus, since the heat added is reduced, the thermal efficiency increases.

REGENERATOR EFFECTIVENESS. From Eq. 9.26 it can be concluded that the external
heat transfer required by a gas turbine power plant decreases as the specific enthalpy
hx increases and thus as the temperature Tx increases. Evidently, there is an incentive in
terms of fuel saved for selecting a regenerator that provides the greatest practical value
for this temperature. To consider the maximum theoretical value for Tx, refer to Fig. 9.15,
which shows temperature variations of the hot and cold streams of a counterflow heat
exchanger.

                                 z                Hotter                                  z                      Hotter
                                                                                                                 stream in
                                                  stream in

Colder                                                                      Colder
stream in                                                                   stream in

                                            Hot   Thot, in                                                Hot    Thot, in
                                            Cold  Tcold, out                                               Cold

Thot, out                                                                      Tcold, in
Tcold, in

                                 T                                                           T  0

                                       z                                                             z

                                       (a)                                                      (b)

 Figure 9.15 Temperature distributions in counterflow heat exchangers. (a) Actual.
(b) Reversible.
                                                                                                                      9.7 Regenerative Gas Turbines 401

 First, refer to Fig. 9.15a. Since a finite temperature difference between the streams is
   required for heat transfer to occur, the temperature of the cold stream at each loca-
   tion, denoted by the coordinate z, is less than that of the hot stream. In particular,
   the temperature of the colder stream as it exits the heat exchanger is less than the
   temperature of the incoming hot stream. If the heat transfer area were increased,
   providing more opportunity for heat transfer between the two streams, there would be
   a smaller temperature difference at each location.

 In the limiting case of infinite heat transfer area, the temperature difference would
   approach zero at all locations, as illustrated in Fig. 9.15b, and the heat transfer would
   approach reversibility. In this limit, the exit temperature of the colder stream would
   approach the temperature of the incoming hot stream. Thus, the highest possible
   temperature that could be achieved by the colder stream is the temperature of the
   incoming hot gas.

   Referring again to the regenerator of Fig. 9.14, we can conclude from the discussion of
Fig. 9.15 that the maximum theoretical value for the temperature Tx is the turbine exhaust
temperature T4, obtained if the regenerator were operating reversibly. The regenerator effec-
tiveness, reg, is a parameter that gauges the departure of an actual regenerator from such an
ideal regenerator. The regenerator effectiveness is defined as the ratio of the actual enthalpy
increase of the air flowing through the compressor side of the regenerator to the maximum
theoretical enthalpy increase. That is,

hreg    hx    h2  (9.27) regenerator effectiveness
        h4    h2

As heat transfer approaches reversibility, hx approaches h4 and hreg tends to unity (100%).
   In practice, regenerator effectiveness values typically range from 60 to 80%, and thus the

temperature Tx of the air exiting on the compressor side of the regenerator is normally well
below the turbine exhaust temperature. To increase the effectiveness above this range would
require greater heat transfer area, resulting in equipment costs that might cancel any advan-
tage due to fuel savings. Moreover, the greater heat transfer area that would be required for
a larger effectiveness can result in a significant frictional pressure drop for flow through the
regenerator, thereby affecting overall performance. The decision to add a regenerator is in-
fluenced by considerations such as these, and the final decision is primarily an economic
one.

   In Example 9.7, we analyze an air-standard Brayton cycle with regeneration and explore
the effect on thermal efficiency as the regenerator effectiveness varies.

E X A M P L E 9 . 7 Brayton Cycle with Regeneration

A regenerator is incorporated in the cycle of Example 9.4. (a) Determine the thermal efficiency for a regenerator effective-
ness of 80%. (b) Plot the thermal efficiency versus regenerator effectiveness ranging from 0 to 80%.

SOLUTION
Known: A regenerative gas turbine operates with air as the working fluid. The compressor inlet state, turbine inlet temper-
ature, and compressor pressure ratio are known.
Find: For a regenerator effectiveness of 80%, determine the thermal efficiency. Also plot the thermal efficiency versus the
regenerator effectiveness ranging from 0 to 80%.
402 Chapter 9 Gas Power Systems
    Schematic and Given Data:

        Regenerator

     y                                                             T                                           3
                                                                                            T3 = 1400 K
                                 Q· in

                  reg =                                                                p = 1000 kPa
                  80%

                                  Combustor
                         x

                  2              3               4                                                   y4

                         T3 = 1400 K                                            2x

     Compressor                         Turbine      ·                                       p = 100 kPa
                                                    Wcycle                             T1 = 300 K
                                                                                1

  1     T1 = 300 K                                                                                                s
        p1 = 100 kPa

                                                                                                                      Figure E9.7a

  Assumptions:

  1. Each component is analyzed as a control volume at steady state. The control volumes are shown on the accompanying
  sketch by dashed lines.
  2. The compressor and turbine processes are isentropic.
  3. There are no pressure drops for flow through the heat exchangers.
  4. The regenerator effectiveness is 80% in part (a).
  5. Kinetic and potential energy effects are negligible.
  6. The working fluid is air modeled as an ideal gas.

  Analysis:

  (a) The specific enthalpy values at the numbered states on the T­s diagram are the same as those in Example 9.4: h1 
  300.19 kJ/ kg, h2  579.9 kJ/ kg, h3  1515.4 kJ/ kg, h4  808.5 kJ/ kg.

      To find the specific enthalpy hx, the regenerator effectiveness is used as follows: By definition

                                                    hreg           hx       h2
                                                                   h4       h2

  Solving for hx

                                 hx  hreg 1h4  h22  h2
                                     10.82 1808.5  579.92  579.9  762.8 kJ/kg

  With the specific enthalpy values determined above, the thermal efficiency is

                                             1W# tm# 2  1W# cm# 2      1h3      h42    1h2    h12
                                                 1Q# inm# 2                     1h3    hx2
                                 h

                                             11515.4  808.52  1579.9  300.192

                                                    11515.4  762.82

                                       0.568 156.8%2
                                                                             9.7 Regenerative Gas Turbines 403

(b) The IT code for the solution follows, where reg is denoted as etareg,  is eta, W# compm# is Wcomp, and so on.

    // Fix the states
    T1 = 300 // K
    p1 = 100 // kPa
    h1 = h_T("Air", T1)
    s1 = s_TP("Air", T1, p1)

    p2 = 1000 // kPa
    s2 = s_TP("Air", T2, p2)
    s2 = s1
    h2 = h_T("Air", T2)

    T3 = 1400 // K
    p3 = p2
    h3 = h_T("Air", T3)
    s3 = s_TP("Air", T3, p3)

    p4 = p1
    s4 = s_TP("Air", T4, p4)
    s4 = s3
    h4 = h_T("Air", T4)
    etareg = 0.8
    hx = etareg * (h4 ­ h2) + h2

    // Thermal efficiency
    Wcomp = h2 ­ h1
    Wturb = h3 ­ h4
    Qin = h3 ­ hx
    eta = (Wturb ­ Wcomp)  Qin

Using the Explore button, sweep etareg from 0 to 0.8 in steps of 0.01. Then, using the Graph button, obtain the following
plot:

                    0.6

                    0.5

Thermal efficiency  0.4

                    0.3

                    0.2

                    0.1

                    0
                     0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8
                                   Regenerator effectiveness

                                                               Figure E9.7b

 From the computer data, we see that the cycle thermal efficiency increases from 0.456, which agrees closely with the result

     of Example 9.4 (no regenerator), to 0.567 for a regenerator effectiveness of 80%, which agrees closely with the result of

     part (a) This trend is also seen in the accompanying graph. Regenerator effectiveness is seen to have a significant effect on

     cycle thermal efficiency.

 The values for work per unit of mass flow of the compressor and turbine are unchanged by the addition of the regenera-

    tor. Thus, the back work ratio and net work output are not affected by this modification.
404 Chapter 9 Gas Power Systems

   Comparing the present thermal efficiency value with the one determined in Example 9.4, it should be evident that the ther-

        mal efficiency can be increased significantly by means of regeneration.

   The regenerator allows improved fuel utilization to be achieved by transferring a portion of the exergy in the hot turbine

        exhaust gas to the cooler air flowing on the other side.

reheat  9.8 Regenerative Gas Turbines with
                 Reheat and Intercooling

        Two modifications of the basic gas turbine that increase the net work developed are multi-
        stage expansion with reheat and multistage compression with intercooling. When used in
        conjunction with regeneration, these modifications can result in substantial increases in ther-
        mal efficiency. The concepts of reheat and intercooling are introduced in this section.

         9.8.1 Gas Turbines with Reheat

        For metallurgical reasons, the temperature of the gaseous combustion products entering the tur-
        bine must be limited. This temperature can be controlled by providing air in excess of the amount
        required to burn the fuel in the combustor (see Chap. 13). As a consequence, the gases exiting
        the combustor contain sufficient air to support the combustion of additional fuel. Some gas tur-
        bine power plants take advantage of the excess air by means of a multistage turbine with a reheat
        combustor between the stages. With this arrangement the net work per unit of mass flow can
        be increased. Let us consider reheat from the vantage point of an air-standard analysis.

            The basic features of a two-stage gas turbine with reheat are brought out by considering
        an ideal air-standard Brayton cycle modified as shown in Fig. 9.16. After expansion from
        state 3 to state a in the first turbine, the gas is reheated at constant pressure from state a to
        state b. The expansion is then completed in the second turbine from state b to state 4. The
        ideal Brayton cycle without reheat, 1­2­3­4­1, is shown on the same T­s diagram for com-
        parison. Because lines of constant pressure on a T­s diagram diverge slightly with increas-
        ing entropy, the total work of the two-stage turbine is greater than that of a single expansion
        from state 3 to state 4. Thus, the net work for the reheat cycle is greater than that of the cy-
        cle without reheat. Despite the increase in net work with reheat, the cycle thermal efficiency
        would not necessarily increase because a greater total heat addition would be required. How-
        ever, the temperature at the exit of the turbine is higher with reheat than without reheat, so
        the potential for regeneration is enhanced.

                    Q· in                 Q· in                       T                     3
                                                                                                    b
           Combustor                        Reheat
                                          combustor                                        a
                                                                                                      4
        2                  3           a             b
                                                                                            4
                                                                         2
                                                                                                       s
                              Turbine                Turbine
                              stage 1
                                                     stage 2   ·
                                                              Wcycle

        Compressor                                                                      1
        1                                                     4

         Figure 9.16 Ideal gas turbine with reheat.
                                                                              9.8 Regenerative Gas Turbines with Reheat and Intercooling 405

   When reheat and regeneration are used together, the thermal efficiency can increase
significantly. The following example provides an illustration.

E X A M P L E 9 . 8 Brayton Cycle with Reheat and Regeneration

Consider a modification of the cycle of Example 9.4 involving reheat and regeneration. Air enters the compressor at 100 kPa,
300 K and is compressed to 1000 kPa. The temperature at the inlet to the first turbine stage is 1400 K. The expansion takes
place isentropically in two stages, with reheat to 1400 K between the stages at a constant pressure of 300 kPa. A regenerator
having an effectiveness of 100% is also incorporated in the cycle. Determine the thermal efficiency.

SOLUTION
Known: An ideal air-standard gas turbine cycle operates with reheat and regeneration. Temperatures and pressures at prin-
cipal states are specified.
Find: Determine the thermal efficiency.
Schematic and Given Data:

T                                    b
                      T3 = 1400 K 3
                                             Assumptions:
   Regenerator                       4 1. Each component of the power plant is analyzed as a control volume at

   exit x                                    steady state.
                     a                       2. The compressor and turbine processes are isentropic.
                                             3. There are no pressure drops for flow through the heat exchangers.
2  p = 1000 kPa  p = 300 kPa                 4. The regenerator effectiveness is 100%.
                 p = 100 kPa                 5. Kinetic and potential energy effects are negligible.
                                             6. The working fluid is air modeled as an ideal gas.
1 T1 = 300 K
                                      s
                                               Figure E9.8

Analysis: We begin by determining the specific enthalpies at each principal state of the cycle. States 1, 2, and 3 are the
same as in Example 9.4: h1  300.19 kJ/kg, h2  579.9 kJ/kg, h3  1515.4 kJ/kg. The temperature at state b is the same as
at state 3, so hb  h3.

    Since the first turbine process is isentropic, the enthalpy at state a can be determined using pr data from Table A-22 and
the relationship

                                     pra    pr3  pa    1450.52  300     135.15
                                                 p3             1000

Interpolating in Table A-22, we get ha  1095.9 kJ/kg.
    The second turbine process is also isentropic, so the enthalpy at state 4 can be determined similarly. Thus

                                     pr4    prb  p4    1450.52  100     150.17
                                                 pb             300

Interpolating in Table A-22, we obtain h4  1127.6 kJ/kg. Since the regenerator effectiveness is 100%, hx  h4 
1127.6 kJ/kg.
406 Chapter 9 Gas Power Systems

      The thermal efficiency calculation must take into account the compressor work, the work of each turbine, and the total
  heat added. Thus, on a unit mass basis

                      1h3          ha2    1hb      h42    1h2    h12
                                   1h3    hx2      1hb    ha2
                h

                      11515.4  1095.92  11515.4  1127.62  1579.9  300.192

                                        11515.4  1127.62  11515.4  1095.92

                    0.654 165.4%2

   Comparing the present value with the thermal efficiency determined in part (a) of Example 9.4, we can conclude that the

      use of reheat coupled with regeneration can result in a substantial increase in thermal efficiency.

intercooler   9.8.2 Compression with Intercooling

             The net work output of a gas turbine also can be increased by reducing the compressor work
             input. This can be accomplished by means of multistage compression with intercooling. The
             present discussion provides an introduction to this subject.

                Let us first consider the work input to compressors at steady state, assuming that irre-
             versibilities are absent and changes in kinetic and potential energy from inlet to exit are
             negligible. The p­v diagram of Fig. 9.17 shows two possible compression paths from a
             specified state 1 to a specified final pressure p2. Path 1­2 is for an adiabatic compression.
             Path 1­2 corresponds to a compression with heat transfer from the working fluid to the sur-
             roundings. The area to the left of each curve equals the magnitude of the work per unit mass
             of the respective process (see Sec. 6.9). The smaller area to the left of Process 1­2 indi-
             cates that the work of this process is less than for the adiabatic compression from 1 to 2.
             This suggests that cooling a gas during compression is advantageous in terms of the work-
             input requirement.

                Although cooling a gas as it is compressed would reduce the work, a heat transfer rate
             high enough to effect a significant reduction in work is difficult to achieve in practice. A
             practical alternative is to separate the work and heat interactions into separate processes
             by letting compression take place in stages with heat exchangers, called intercoolers, cool-
             ing the gas between stages. Figure 9.18 illustrates a two-stage compressor with an

             p

                                   2 2         p2

                                               Adiabatic compression

                                               Compression with cooling

                   ·
                 _Wm_·_c           2
                      int =
                      rev           vdp

                                   1

                                                                   p1      Figure 9.17 Internally reversible compres-
                                                                 T1       sion processes between two fixed pressures.

                                                                       v
   Compressor                                            2                9.8 Regenerative Gas Turbines with Reheat and Intercooling 407
      stage 1                                                      W· c
                                            Compressor
                                               stage 2

   1c                                       d

               Intercooler

               Q· out

p                                           T
                                                                     p2
a  2  2

      T=c d c                                               2   2  pi
                                  pi
                                                                         p1
                                  s=c
b                                                               c

                                     1                      d1
                                         v
                                                                                   Figure 9.18 Two-stage
                                                                             s compression with intercooling.

intercooler. The accompanying p­v and T­s diagrams show the states for internally
reversible processes:

 Process 1­ c is an isentropic compression from state 1 to state c where the pressure
   is pi.

 Process c ­ d is constant-pressure cooling from temperature Tc to Td.
 Process d ­2 is an isentropic compression to state 2.

The work input per unit of mass flow is represented on the p­v diagram by shaded area
1­c­d­2­a­b­1. Without intercooling the gas would be compressed isentropically in a sin-
gle stage from state 1 to state 2 and the work would be represented by enclosed area
1­2­a­b­1. The crosshatched area on the p­v diagram represents the reduction in work that
would be achieved with intercooling.

   Some large compressors have several stages of compression with intercooling between
stages. The determination of the number of stages and the conditions at which to operate
the various intercoolers is a problem in optimization. The use of multistage compression
with intercooling in a gas turbine power plant increases the net work developed by reduc-
ing the compression work. By itself, though, compression with intercooling would not nec-
essarily increase the thermal efficiency of a gas turbine because the temperature of the air
entering the combustor would be reduced (compare temperatures at states 2 and 2 on the
T­s diagram of Fig. 9.18). A lower temperature at the combustor inlet would require addi-
tional heat transfer to achieve the desired turbine inlet temperature. The lower temperature
at the compressor exit enhances the potential for regeneration, however, so when intercooling
is used in conjunction with regeneration, an appreciable increase in thermal efficiency can
result.
408 Chapter 9 Gas Power Systems

                                    In the next example, we analyze a two-stage compressor with intercooling between the
                                stages. Results are compared with those for a single stage of compression.

    E X A M P L E 9 . 9 Compression with Intercooling

    Air is compressed from 100 kPa, 300 K to 1000 kPa in a two-stage compressor with intercooling between stages. The inter-
    cooler pressure is 300 kPa. The air is cooled back to 300 K in the intercooler before entering the second compressor stage.
    Each compressor stage is isentropic. For steady-state operation and negligible changes in kinetic and potential energy from
    inlet to exit, determine (a) the temperature at the exit of the second compressor stage and (b) the total compressor work input
    per unit of mass flow. (c) Repeat for a single stage of compression from the given inlet state to the final pressure.

    SOLUTION
    Known: Air is compressed at steady state in a two-stage compressor with intercooling between stages. Operating pressures
    and temperatures are given.
    Find: Determine the temperature at the exit of the second compressor stage and the total work input per unit of mass flow.
    Repeat for a single stage of compression.
    Schematic and Given Data:

                                             p2 = 1000 kPa

                                             2                                  23
                                                                   p                         p2 = 1000 kPa

           Compressor               Compressor
              stage 1
                                    stage 2      ·
                                                Wc

             1c        Intercooler   d                                           dc        pi = 300 kPa
                                    Td = 300 K                                  T
T1 = 300 K                                                                      1 = 300 K          p1 = 100 kPa
p1 = 100 kPa                                                                                 1

                                                                                                 v

                       Q· out

                                                                                                                  Figure E9.9

Assumptions:

1. The compressor stages and intercooler are analyzed as control volumes at steady state. The control volumes are shown on
the accompanying sketch by dashed lines.
2. The compression processes are isentropic.
3. There is no pressure drop for flow through the intercooler.
4. Kinetic and potential energy effects are negligible.
5. The air is modeled as an ideal gas.

Analysis:

(a) The temperature at the exit of the second compressor stage, T2, can be found using the following relationship for the isen-
tropic process d­2

                                                            pr2       pr d  p2
                                                                            pd
                              9.8 Regenerative Gas Turbines with Reheat and Intercooling 409

With prd at Td  300 K from Table A-22, p2  1000 kPa, and pd  300 kPa,

                  pr2         11.3862                     1000        4.62
                                                          300

Interpolating in Table A-22, we get T2  422 K and h2  423.8 kJ/kg

(b) The total compressor work input per unit of mass is the sum of the work inputs for the two stages. That is

                  #

                  Wc       1hc                            h12    1h2    hd2
                   #
                  m

    From Table A-22 at T1  300 K, h1  300.19 kJ/kg. Since Td  T1, hd  300.19 kJ/kg. To find hc, use pr data from
Table A-22 together with p1  100 kPa and pc  300 kPa to write

            pr c     pr1  pc    11.3862                          300     4.158
                          p1                                     100

Interpolating in Table A-22, we obtain hc  411.3 kJ/kg. Hence, the total compressor work per unit of mass is

#

Wc    1411.3      300.192       1423.8                             300.192      234.7  kJ/kg
 #
m

(c) For a single isentropic stage of compression, the exit state would be state 3 located on the accompanying p­v diagram.
The temperature at this state can be determined using

            pr3      pr1  p3    11.3862                          1000    13.86
                          p1                                     100

Interpolating in Table A-22, we get T3  574 K and h3  579.9 kJ/kg.

The work input for a single stage of compression is then

      #

      Wc    h3       h1       579.9                            300.19    279.7  kJ/kg
       #
      m

This calculation confirms that a smaller work input is required with two-stage compression and intercooling than with a single
stage of compression. With intercooling, however, a much lower gas temperature is achieved at the compressor exit.

   Referring again to Fig. 9.18, the size of the crosshatched area on the p­v diagram repre-

senting the reduction in work with intercooling depends on both the temperature Td at the
exit of the intercooler and the intercooler pressure pi. By properly selecting Td and pi, the
total work input to the compressor can be minimized. For example, if the pressure pi is spec-
ified, the work input would decrease (crosshatched area would increase) as the temperature

Td approaches T1, the temperature at the inlet to the compressor. For air entering the com-
pressor from the surroundings, T1 would be the limiting temperature that could be achieved
at state d through heat transfer with the surroundings only. Also, for a specified value of the

temperature Td, the pressure pi can be selected so that the total work input is a minimum
(crosshatched area is a maximum).

   Example 9.10 provides an illustration of the determination of the intercooler pressure for

minimum total work using a cold air-standard analysis.

E X A M P L E 9 . 1 0 Intercooler Pressure for Minimum Compressor Work

If the inlet state and the exit pressure are specified for a two-stage compressor operating at steady state, show that the mini-
mum total work input is required when the pressure ratio is the same across each stage. Use a cold air-standard analysis
assuming that each compression process is isentropic, there is no pressure drop through the intercooler, and the temperature
at the inlet to each compressor stage is the same. Kinetic and potential energy effects can be ignored.
410 Chapter 9 Gas Power Systems

SOLUTION
Known: A two-stage compressor with intercooling operates at steady state under specified conditions.
Find: Show that the minimum total work input is required when the pressure ratio is the same across each stage.
Schematic and Given Data:

p                                    p2 specified                   Assumptions:
           2
                                                                    1. The compressor stages and intercooler are analyzed as control volumes
                       c        s=c   pi variable                   at steady state.
              ds=c                   1                              2. The compression processes are isentropic.
                                                                    3. There is no pressure drop for flow through the intercooler.
                  T=c                                               4. The temperature at the inlet to both compressor stages is the same.
                                                                    5. Kinetic and potential energy effects are negligible.
Compressor inlet state specified                                    6. The working fluid is air modeled as an ideal gas.
                                                                    7. The specific heat cp and the specific heat ratio k are constant.
                                                      v
                                                                     Figure E9.10

Analysis:     The total compressor work input per unit of mass flow is

                                                              #

                                                              Wc          1hc        h12        1h2             hd2
                                                               #
                                                              m

Since cp is constant

                                                           #

                                                         Wc         cp1Tc            T12        cp1T2               Td2
                                                          #
                                                         m

With Td  T1 (assumption 4), this becomes on rearrangement

                                                                 #

                                                              Wc          cpT1      a  Tc       T2            2b
                                                               #                       T1       T1
                                                              m

    Since the compression processes are isentropic and the specific heat ratio k is constant, the pressure and temperature ratios
across the compressor stages are related, respectively, by

                                            Tc           pi     1k   12k                             T2              p2    1k    12k

                                            T1        a  p1   b                      and             Td           a  pi  b

In the second of these equations, Td  T1 by assumption 4.

Collecting results

                                                  #                             1k    12k                   1k    12k

                                                  Wc          cpT1  c  a  pi  b                 a    p2   b                2d
                                                   #
                                                  m                       p1                         pi

Hence, for specified values of T1, p1, p2, and cp, the value of the total compressor work input varies with the intercooler pres-

sure only. To determine the pressure pi that minimizes the total work, form the derivative

                                       #    m# 2       0                      pi    1k     12k            p2    1k   12k
                                                      0pi
                                     0 1Wc                    e cpT1   c  a       b                  a        b                  2d     f

                                     0pi                                      p1                          pi

                                                      cpT1    ak          1b   c  a  pi   1k           1  b         a  p2   1k             p2   b  d
                                                                    k                                                  pi                  p2i
                                                                                     p1  ba          p1                    b a

                                                      cpT1 a k            1b   1           pi    1k    12k             p2    1k    12k
                                                                    k          pi
                                                                                     c  a  p1  b                    a  pi  b            d
                                                           9.8 Regenerative Gas Turbines with Reheat and Intercooling 411

  When the partial derivative is set to zero, the desired relationship is obtained

                                                           pi  p2
                                                           p1 pi

  By checking the sign of the second derivative, it can be verified that the total compressor work is a minimum.

   This relationship is for a two-stage compressor. Appropriate relations can be obtained similarly for multistage compressors.

 9.8.3 Reheat and Intercooling

Reheat between turbine stages and intercooling between compressor stages provide two im-
portant advantages: The net work output is increased, and the potential for regeneration is
enhanced. Accordingly, when reheat and intercooling are used together with regeneration,
a substantial improvement in performance can be realized. One arrangement incorporating
reheat, intercooling, and regeneration is shown in Fig. 9.19. This gas turbine has two stages
of compression and two turbine stages. The accompanying T­s diagram is drawn to indi-
cate irreversibilities in the compressor and turbine stages. The pressure drops that would
occur as the working fluid passes through the intercooler, regenerator, and combustors are
not shown.

                         10     Regenerator

                                                    ·               ·
                                                   Qin, 1          Qin, 2

                                            Combustor 1        Combustor 2
                                     5

                                4               6           7               8                9

Compressor               Compressor                Turbine                          Turbine                                    ·
      1                        2                       1                                2                                     Wcycle

12                           3

            Intercooler

                                             T                     6
                                                                            8

             ·                                             5           7                9
            Qout                                                   7s

                                                                                    9s

                                                4s 4 2s 2          10

                                                                    3
                                                                           1
                                                                                                                           s

 Figure 9.19 Regenerative gas turbine with intercooling and reheat.
412 Chapter 9 Gas Power Systems

                                    Example 9.11 illustrates the analysis of a regenerative gas turbine with intercooling and
                                reheat.

E X A M P L E 9 . 1 1 Regenerative Gas Turbine with Intercooling and Reheat

A regenerative gas turbine with intercooling and reheat operates at steady state. Air enters the compressor at 100 kPa, 300 K
with a mass flow rate of 5.807 kg/s. The pressure ratio across the two-stage compressor is 10. The pressure ratio across the
two-stage turbine is also 10. The intercooler and reheater each operate at 300 kPa. At the inlets to the turbine stages, the tem-
perature is 1400 K. The temperature at the inlet to the second compressor stage is 300 K. The isentropic efficiency of each
compressor and turbine stage is 80%. The regenerator effectiveness is 80%. Determine (a) the thermal efficiency, (b) the back
work ratio, (c) the net power developed, in kW.

SOLUTION

Known: An air-standard regenerative gas turbine with intercooling and reheat operates at steady state. Operating pressures
and temperatures are specified. Turbine and compressor isentropic efficiencies are given and the regenerator effectiveness is
known.

Find: Determine the thermal efficiency, back work ratio, and net power developed, in kW.

Schematic and Given Data:

                                   10     Regenerator

                                                                  Q· in, 1                Q· in, 2

                                                       Combustor                 Reheat
                                               5                               combustor

                                          4                    6            7                       8            9

       Compressor                  Compressor  p4 = p5 = p6 =     Turbine                              Turbine
             1                           2     1000 kPa               1                                    2

                                                                                                                        ·
                                                                                                                       Wcycle

       12                              3                       T6 = T8 = 1400 K               p7 = p8 = 300 kPa
                                                                                       5
                      Intercooler

                                                                                                       6        8

T1 = 300 K                                           T

mp· 1  =  100 kPa     p2 = p3 = 300 kPa                                                             7s    7         9
       =  5.807 kg/s   ·
                      Qout
                                                                                                             9s

                                                        4s 4 2s 2                         10

                                                        31
                                                                                                                  s

 Figure E9.11
                                                 9.8 Regenerative Gas Turbines with Reheat and Intercooling 413

Assumptions:

1. Each component is analyzed as a control volume at steady state. The control volumes are shown on the accompanying
sketch by dashed lines.
2. There are no pressure drops for flow through the heat exchangers.
3. The compressor and turbine are adiabatic.
4. Kinetic and potential energy effects are negligible.
5. The working fluid is air modeled as an ideal gas.

Analysis: We begin by listing the specific enthalpies at the principal states of this cycle. The enthalpies at states 1, 2s, 3,

and 4s are obtained from the solution to Example 9.9 where these states are designated as 1, c, d, and 2, respectively. Thus,
h1  h3  300.19 kJ/kg, h2s  411.3 kJ/kg, h4s  423.8 kJ/kg.

    The specific enthalpies at states 6, 7s, 8, and 9s are obtained from the solution to Example 9.8, where these states are des-
ignated as 3, a, b, and 4, respectively. Thus, h6  h8  1515.4 kJ/kg, h7s  1095.9 kJ/kg, h9s  1127.6 kJ/kg.

    The specific enthalpy at state 4 can be determined using the isentropic efficiency of the second compressor stage

                                               hc              h4s  h3
                                                               h4  h3

Solving for h4

                      h4       h3    h4s     h3           300.19         a 423.8   300.19b
                                        hc                                        0.8

                           454.7 kJ/kg

Similarly, the specific enthalpy at state 2 is h2  439.1 kJ/kg.
    The specific enthalpy at state 9 can be determined using the isentropic efficiency of the second turbine stage

                                               ht              h8  h9
                                                               h8  h9s

Solving for h9

                   h9  h8  ht 1h8  h9s2  1515.4  0.811515.4  1127.62
                       1205.2 kJ/kg

Similarly, the specific enthalpy at state 7 is h7  1179.8 kJ/kg.
    The specific enthalpy at state 5 can be determined using the regenerator effectiveness

                                               hreg            h5    h4
                                                               h9    h4

Solving for h5

                   h5  h4  hreg 1h9  h42  454.7  0.811205.2  454.72
                       1055.1 kJ/kg

(a) The thermal efficiency must take into account the work of both turbine stages, the work of both compressor stages, and
the total heat added. The total turbine work per unit of mass flow is

                #

                Wt      1h6    h72      1h8      h92
                 #
                m

                       11515.4  1179.82  11515.4  1205.22  645.8 kJ/kg

The total compressor work input per unit of mass flow is

                   #

                Wc        1h2      h12    1h4             h32
                 #
                m

                       1439.1  300.192  1454.7  300.192  293.4 kJ/kg
414 Chapter 9 Gas Power Systems

  The total heat added per unit of mass flow is

                                  #

                                 Qin      1h6      h52       1h8    h72
                                  #
                                 m

                                       11515.4  1055.12  11515.4  1179.82  795.9 kJ/kg

  Calculating the thermal efficiency

                                                   h    645.8  293.4             0.443  1 44.3 % 2
                                                             795.9

  (b) The back work ratio is

                                               bwr           #  m#        293.4    0.454  145.4 % 2
                                                            Wc            645.8
                                                             #
                                                            Wt  m#

  (c) The net power developed is

                                   #            #    #  m#       #  m# 2
                                  Wcycle       m   1Wt          Wc

                                           a5.807 kg b 1645.8  293.42 kJ ` 1 kJ/s `  2046 kW
                                                          s                        kg 1 kW

   Comparing the thermal efficiency, back work ratio, and net power values of the current example with the corresponding

      values of Example 9.6, it should be evident that gas turbine power plant performance can be increased significantly by

      coupling reheat and intercooling with regeneration.

turbojet engine  9.9 Gas Turbines for Aircraft Propulsion
ram effect
                 Gas turbines are particularly suited for aircraft propulsion because of their favorable power-
                 to-weight ratios. The turbojet engine is commonly used for this purpose. As illustrated in
                 Fig. 9.20, this type of engine consists of three main sections: the diffuser, the gas generator,
                 and the nozzle. The diffuser placed before the compressor decelerates the incoming air rel-
                 ative to the engine. A pressure rise known as the ram effect is associated with this deceler-
                 ation. The gas generator section consists of a compressor, combustor, and turbine, with the
                 same functions as the corresponding components of a stationary gas turbine power plant. In
                 a turbojet engine, the turbine power output need only be sufficient to drive the compressor

                                      Compressor                    Combustors Turbine               T                                    3
                                                                                                            2     p=c
                                     Air                                                Product             1
                                     in                                                 gases out                                         4

                                                                                                                                        5
                                                                                                                    p=c

                                                                                                               a

                              a             1                2            3        4          5

                                 Diffuser                 Gas generator               Nozzle                                              s
                                                                (a)                                               (b)

                  Figure 9.20 Turbojet engine schematic and accompanying ideal T­s diagram.
                                                               9.9 Gas Turbines for Aircraft Propulsion 415

 Compressor                 Turbine  Fuel-spray bars

Air          Combustors              Flame holder
in

Diffuser     Gas generator           Afterburner duct          Adjustable
                                                                 nozzle

 Figure 9.21 Schematic of a turbojet engine with afterburner.

and auxiliary equipment, however. The gases leave the turbine at a pressure significantly        afterburner
greater than atmospheric and expand through the nozzle to a high velocity before being dis-
charged to the surroundings. The overall change in the velocity of the gases relative to the
engine gives rise to the propulsive force, or thrust. Some turbojets are equipped with an
afterburner, as shown in Fig. 9.21. This is essentially a reheat device in which additional
fuel is injected into the gas exiting the turbine and burned, producing a higher temperature
at the nozzle inlet than would be achieved otherwise. As a consequence, a greater nozzle exit
velocity is attained, resulting in increased thrust.

TURBOJET ANALYSIS. The T­s diagram of the processes in an ideal turbojet engine is
shown in Fig. 9.20b. In accordance with the assumptions of an air-standard analysis, the
working fluid is air modeled as an ideal gas. The diffuser, compressor, turbine, and nozzle
processes are isentropic, and the combustor operates at constant pressure.

 Process a­1 shows the pressure rise that occurs in the diffuser as the air decelerates
   isentropically through this component.

 Process 1­2 is an isentropic compression.

 Process 2­3 is a constant-pressure heat addition.

 Process 3 ­ 4 is an isentropic expansion through the turbine during which work is
   developed.

 Process 4 ­5 is an isentropic expansion through the nozzle in which the air accelerates
   and the pressure decreases.

   Owing to irreversibilities in an actual engine, there would be increases in specific entropy
across the diffuser, compressor, turbine, and nozzle. In addition, there would be a pressure
drop through the combustor of the actual engine. Further details regarding flow through noz-
zles and diffusers are provided in Secs. 9.13 and 9.14. The subject of combustion is discussed
in Chap. 13.

   In a typical thermodynamic analysis of a turbojet on an air-standard basis the following
quantities might be known: the velocity at the diffuser inlet, the compressor pressure ratio,
and the turbine inlet temperature. The objective of the analysis would be to determine the
velocity at the nozzle exit. Once the nozzle exit velocity is determined, the thrust is deter-
mined by applying Newton's second law of motion in a form suitable for a control volume
(Sec. 9.12). All principles required for the thermodynamic analysis of turbojet engines on an
air-standard basis have been introduced. Example 9.12 provides an illustration.
416 Chapter 9 Gas Power Systems

    E X A M P L E 9 . 1 2 Analyzing a Turbojet Engine

    Air enters a turbojet engine at 0.8 bar, 240K, and an inlet velocity of 1000 km/h (278 m/s). The pressure ratio across the
    compressor is 8. The turbine inlet temperature is 1200K and the pressure at the nozzle exit is 0.8 bar. The work developed
    by the turbine equals the compressor work input. The diffuser, compressor, turbine, and nozzle processes are isentropic, and
    there is no pressure drop for flow through the combustor. For operation at steady state, determine the velocity at the nozzle
    exit and the pressure at each principal state. Neglect kinetic energy at the exit of all components except the nozzle and neg-
    lect potential energy throughout.

    SOLUTION
    Known: An ideal turbojet engine operates at steady state. Key operating conditions are specified.
    Find: Determine the velocity at the nozzle exit, in ft/s, and the pressure, in lbf/in.2, at each principal state.
    Schematic and Given Data:

                                                                   T          T3 = 1200°K

                                                                                                    3

                                      ·                                                             4
                                     Q in
                                           T3 = 1200°K

                              Combustor                                   2                         5

                         2                          3

                                                                          1

                Compressor                       Turbine                     a Ta = 240°K

                                                                                                       s

                              p2/p1 = 8

Diffuser                                                              Nozzle

           a     V1 = 0                                         4                   5 p5 = 0.8 bar
                1
Ta = 240°K
pa = 0.8 bar
Va = 1000 km/h

 Figure E9.12

Assumptions:

1. Each component is analyzed as a control volume at steady state. The control volumes are shown on the accompanying
sketch by dashed lines.
2. The diffuser, compressor, turbine, and nozzle processes are isentropic.
3. There is no pressure drop for flow through the combustor.
4. The turbine work output equals the work required to drive the compressor.
5. Except at the inlet and exit of the engine, kinetic energy effects can be ignored. Potential energy effects are negligible
throughout.
6. The working fluid is air modeled as an ideal gas.

Analysis: To determine the velocity at the exit to the nozzle, the mass and energy rate balances for a control volume en-
closing this component reduce at steady state to give

                                                                   a V24  0  V52 b

                         0     #0     #0      #  c  1h4    h52                        g1z4    0
                              Qcv    W cv    m                            2
                                                                                              z52 d
                                                                                         9.9 Gas Turbines for Aircraft Propulsion 417

           #
  where m is the mass flow rate. The inlet kinetic energy is dropped by assumption 5. Solving for V5

                                                     V5  121h4  h52

  This expression requires values for the specific enthalpies h4 and h5 at the nozzle inlet and exit, respectively. With the oper-
  ating parameters specified, the determination of these enthalpy values is accomplished by analyzing each component in turn,

  beginning with the diffuser. The pressure at each principal state can be evaluated as a part of the analyses required to find the

  enthalpies h4 and h5.
      Mass and energy rate balances for a control volume enclosing the diffuser reduce to give

                                                           h1      ha       V2a
                                                                            2

  With ha from Table A-22 and the given value of Va

                                                           127822 m2               1N         1 kJ
                  h1  240.02 kJ /kg  c 2 d a s2 b ` 1 kg # m /s2 ` ` 103 N # m `

                   278.7 kJ /kg

  Interpolating in Table A-22 gives pr1  1.070. The flow through the diffuser is isentropic, so pressure p1 is

                                                               p1     pr1  pa
                                                                      pra

  With pr data from Table A-22 and the known value of pa

                                           p1        1.070     10.8   bar2       1.347  bars
                                                     0.6355

  Using the given compressor pressure ratio, the pressure at state 2 is p2  8(1.347 bars)  10.78 bars
      The flow through the compressor is also isentropic. Thus

                                                pr2       pr1  p2     1.07182      8.56
                                                               p1

  Interpolating in Table A-22, we get h2  505.5 kJ/ kg.

  At state 3 the temperature is given as T3  1200 K. From Table A-22, h3  1277.79 kJ/ kg. By assumption 3, p3  p2. The

  work developed by the turbine is just sufficient to drive the compressor (assumption 4). That is

                                                                   ##

                                                               Wt      Wc
                                                                #       #
                                                               mm

  or
                                                                   h3  h4  h2  h1

  Solving for h4

                  h4  h3  h1  h2  1277.79  278.7  505.5
                      1051 kJ/kg

  Interpolating in Table A-22 with h4, gives pr4  116.8
      The expansion through the turbine is isentropic, so

                                                               p4     p3  pr4
                                                                          pr3

  With p3  p2 and pr data from Table A-22

                                           p4     110.78       bars2  116.0       5.25  bars
                                                                      238.0

  The expansion through the nozzle is isentropic to p5  0.8 bars. Thus

                                           pr5       pr4  p5       1116.02  0.8      17.68
                                                          p4                5.25
418 Chapter 9 Gas Power Systems

  From Table A-22, h5  265.8 Btu / lb, which is the remaining specific enthalpy value required to determine the velocity at the
  nozzle exit.

      Using the values for h4 and h5 determined above, the velocity at the nozzle exit is

  V5  121h4  h52

                                 B 2 1 1051    621.32  kJ   1  kg # m /s2    a 103 N #  mb
                                                       kg  a              b       1 kJ

                                                                 1N

              927 m /s

   Note the unit conversions required here and in the calculation of V5.
   The increase in the velocity of the air as it passes through the engine gives rise to the thrust produced by the engine. A

      detailed analysis of the forces acting on the engine requires Newton's second law of motion in a form suitable for control

      volumes (See Sec. 9.12.1).

  OTHER APPLICATIONS. Other related applications of the gas turbine include turboprop and
  turbofan engines. The turboprop engine shown in Fig. 9.22a consists of a gas turbine in which
  the gases are allowed to expand through the turbine to atmospheric pressure. The net power
  developed is directed to a propeller, which provides thrust to the aircraft. Turboprops are ef-
  ficient propulsion devices for speeds of up to about 600 km/h (400 miles/h). In the turbo-
  fan shown in Fig. 9.22b, the core of the engine is much like a turbojet, and some thrust is
  obtained from expansion through the nozzle. However, a set of large-diameter blades attached
  to the front of the engine accelerates air around the core. This bypass flow provides addi-
  tional thrust for takeoff, whereas the core of the engine provides the primary thrust for
  cruising. Turbofan engines are commonly used for commercial aircraft with flight speeds of
  up to about 1000 km/h (600 miles/h). A particularly simple type of engine known as a ram-
  jet is shown in Fig. 9.22c. This engine requires neither a compressor nor a turbine. A suffi-
  cient pressure rise is obtained by decelerating the high-speed incoming air in the diffuser

                                                                             Fan            By-pass flow

  Propeller                                                                                                   Basic engine-core
                                                                                                   (b)
                                             (a)
                                                             Diffuser                       Nozzle

   Figure 9.22                                                      Flame holder
                                                                               (c)

                                 Other examples of aircraft engines. (a) Turboprop. (b) Turbofan. (c) Ramjet.
                                                               9.10 Combined Gas Turbine­Vapor Power Cycle 419

(ram effect). For the ramjet to operate, therefore, the aircraft must already be in flight at high
speed. The combustion products exiting the combustor are expanded through the nozzle to
produce the thrust.

   In each of the engines mentioned thus far, combustion of the fuel is supported by air
brought into the engines from the atmosphere. For very high-altitude flight and space travel,
where this is no longer possible, rockets may be employed. In these applications, both fuel
and an oxidizer (such as liquid oxygen) are carried on board the craft. Thrust is developed
when the high-pressure gases obtained on combustion are expanded through a nozzle and
discharged from the rocket.

9.10 Combined Gas Turbine­Vapor
           Power Cycle

A combined power cycle couples two power cycles such that the energy discharged by heat             combined cycle
transfer from one cycle is used partly or wholly as the input for the other cycle. The binary       topping cycle
vapor cycle introduced in Sec. 8.5 is an example of a combined power cycle. In the present
section, a combined gas turbine­vapor power cycle is considered.

   The stream exiting the turbine of a gas turbine is at a high temperature. One way the po-
tential (exergy) of this high-temperature gas stream can be used, thereby improving overall
fuel utilization, is by a regenerator that allows the turbine exhaust gas to preheat the air be-
tween the compressor and combustor (Sec. 9.7). Another method is provided by the com-
bined cycle shown in Fig. 9.23, involving a gas turbine cycle and a vapor power cycle. The
two power cycles are coupled so that the heat transfer to the vapor cycle is provided by the
gas turbine cycle, which may be called the topping cycle.

                     ·
                    Qin

                              Combustor      3        W· gas
               2                           Turbine

                              Gas turbine
           Compressor

Air inlet  1

Exhaust                                       4

           5

                                           7
              Heat exchanger

                                           Turbine    W· vap

           6  Vapor

              cycle                        8

              Pump                         Condenser

                     9                                Cooling   Figure 9.23 Combined
                                                       water   gas turbine­vapor power
                                                               plant.
420 Chapter 9 Gas Power Systems

Thermodynamics in the News...

New Power Plant Breaks Imagined Barrier                         than before. Advanced
                                                                blade cooling meth-
The new General Electric H SystemTM is the first combined-      ods, new alloys, and
cycle power plant to achieve 60% thermal efficiency, once the   unique single crystal
"four minute mile" of power plant technology. The installa-     blade construction al-
tion is in Wales, where the 480-megawatt system provides        low the turbines to
power to adjacent chemical manufacturing plants and to the      withstand higher tem-
energy grid.                                                    peratures. The high
                                                                thermal efficiency also
    Development efforts began in the early 1990s, when the      results in the lowest
best available technology combining gas and steam turbines      carbon dioxide pro-
achieved thermal efficiencies of only 50%. Each percentage in-  duction per megawatt
crease is estimated to save $15­20 million dollars of natural   of electricity of any gas
gas over the life of a typical system, according to industry    turbine in the world.
sources. Electric rates with the H SystemTM are said to be 30%  Nitric oxide (NOX)
less than were previously available.                            emission levels are
                                                                half the average of other turbines now in use.
    The efficiency gains are achieved because natural gas
is burned at a temperature nearly 300F (167C) higher

   The combined cycle has the gas turbine's high average temperature of heat addition and
the vapor cycle's low average temperature of heat rejection, and thus a thermal efficiency
greater than either cycle would have individually. For many applications combined cycles
are economical, and they are increasingly being used worldwide for electric power gener-
ation.

   With reference to Fig. 9.23, the thermal efficiency of the combined cycle is

                                                                             #          #

                                                                             Wgas       Wvap                    (9.28)
                                                                                    #
                                                                       h
                                                                                   Qin

   #                                                                                                #

where Wgas is the net pow#er developed by the gas turbine and Wvap is the net power devel-

oped by the vapor cycle. Qin denotes the total rate of heat transfer to the combined cycle, in-

cluding additional heat transfer, if any, to superheat the vapor entering the vapor turbine. The

evaluation of the quantities appearing in Eq. 9.28 follows the procedures described in the

sections on vapor cycles and gas turbines.

The relation for the energy transferred from the gas cycle to the vapor cycle for the system

of Fig. 9.23 is obtained by applying the mass and energy rate balances to a control volume

enclosing the heat exchanger. For steady-state operation, negligible heat transfer with the sur-

roundings, and no significant changes in kinetic and potential energy, the result is

                                                                 #  1  h7    h62    m# g1h4    h52              (9.29)
                                                                mv

#                                #
where mg and mv are the mass flow rates of the gas and vapor, respectively.

As witnessed by relations such as Eqs. 9.28 and 9.29, combined cycle performance can

be analyzed using mass and energy balances. To complete the analysis, however, the second

law is required to assess the impact of irreversibilities and the true magnitudes of losses.

Among the irreversibilities, the most significant is the exergy destroyed by combustion. About

30% of the exergy entering the combustor with the fuel is destroyed by combustion irre-

versibility. An analysis of the gas turbine on an air-standard basis does not allow this exergy

destruction to be evaluated, however, and means introduced in Chap. 13 must be applied for

this purpose.

The next example illustrates the use of mass and energy balances, the second law, and

property data to analyze combined cycle performance.
                                                                                          9.10 Combined Gas Turbine­Vapor Power Cycle 421

E X A M P L E 9 . 1 3 Combined Cycle Exergy Accounting

A combined gas turbine­vapor power plant has a net power output of 45 MW. Air enters the compressor of the gas turbine
at 100 kPa, 300 K, and is compressed to 1200 kPa. The isentropic efficiency of the compressor is 84%. The condition at the
inlet to the turbine is 1200 kPa, 1400 K. Air expands through the turbine, which has an isentropic efficiency of 88%, to a
pressure of 100 kPa. The air then passes through the interconnecting heat exchanger and is finally discharged at 400 K. Steam
enters the turbine of the vapor power cycle at 8 MPa, 400C, and expands to the condenser pressure of 8 kPa. Water enters
the pump as saturated liquid at 8 kPa. The turbine and pump of the vapor cycle have isentropic efficiencies of 90 and 80%,
respectively.

(a) Determine the mass flow rates of the air and the steam, each in kg/s, and the net power developed by the gas turbine and
vapor power cycle, each in MW.
(b) Develop a full accounting of the net rate of exergy increase as the air passes through the gas turbine combustor. Discuss.
Let T0  300 K, p0  100 kPa.

SOLUTION

Known: A combined gas turbine­vapor power plant operates at steady state with a known net power output. Operating pres-
sures and temperatures are specified. Turbine, compressor, and pump efficiencies are also given.

Find: Determine the mass flow rate of each working fluid, in kg/s, and the net power developed by each cycle, in MW.
Develop a full accounting of the exergy increase of the air passing through the gas turbine combustor and discuss the results.

Schematic and Given Data:

                              Q· in

                  2     Combustor                    T3 = 1400 K              Assumptions:
c = 84%                 Gas turbine               3 p3 = p2 = 1200 kPa        1. Each component on the accompanying
                                                                              sketch is analyzed as a control volume at steady
            Compressor                                      t = 88%           state.
                                                                              2. The turbines, compressor, pump, and inter-
                                                  Turbine             ·       connecting heat exchanger operate adiabati-
                                                                     Wgas =   cally.
             T1 = 300 K                                               ··      3. Kinetic and potential energy effects are neg-
           1 p1 = 100 kPa                                            Wt ­ Wc  ligible.
                                                                              4. There are no pressure drops for flow through
Air inlet                                            4                        the combustor, interconnecting heat exchanger,
                                                                              and condenser.
Exhaust                                              T7 = 400°C               5. An air-standard analysis is used for the gas
      T5 = 400 K 5                                7 p7 = 8 MPa                turbine.
      p5 = p4 = 100 kPa                                                       6. T0  300 K, p0  100 kPa.
                                                            t = 90%
                                  Heat exchanger                               Figure E9.13

                                                  Turbine             ·
                                                                     Wvap =
           6            Vapor                                         ··
                                                                     Wt ­ Wp
                        cycle                     8

                        Pump                      Condenser              ·
                                                                        Qout

                                     9

              p = 80%                             p9 = p8 = 8 kPa
422 Chapter 9 Gas Power Systems

Analysis: The property data given in the table below are determined using procedures illustrated in previous solved exam-
ples of Chaps. 8 and 9. The details are left as an exercise.

State                       Gas Turbine               s (kJ/kg # K)                                State                            Vapor Cycle    s (kJ/kg # K)

  1                  h (kJ/kg)                           1.7020                                      6                              h (kJ/kg)         0.5975
  2                                                      2.5088                                      7                                                6.3634
  3                    300.19                            3.3620                                      8                                 183.96         6.7282
  4                    669.79                            2.7620                                      9                               3138.30          0.5926
  5                  1515.42                             1.9919                                                                      2104.74
                       858.02                                                                                                          173.88
                       400.98

                                                                      #                            #
(a) To determine the mass flow rates of the vapor, mv, and the air, mg, begin by applying mass and energy rate balances to

the interconnecting heat exchanger to obtain

                                                           0      m# g1h4         h52         #    1  h6          h72
                                                                                             mv

or

                                                     #     h4       h5        858.02            400.98                 0.1547
                                                    mv     h7       h6        3138.3            183.96
                                                     #
                                                    mg

    Mass and energy rate balances applied to the gas turbine and vapor power cycles give the net power developed by each,
respectively

                                                            #          #  3  1h3     h42           1h2            h12 4
                                                           Wgas       mg
                                                            #
                                                           Wvap        #  3  1h7     h82           1h6            h92 4
                                                                      mv

       #        #         #

With Wnet  Wgas  Wvap

                                                                                                #
                                                                                                mv
                                 #          #    e  3 1h3    h42         1h2      h12 4          #    3 1h7          h82       1h6    h92 4  f
                                Wnet       mg                                                   mg

Solving    for   #   and  inserting   #      45     MW         45,000     kJ/s    and     #     m# a           0.1547,       we  get
                mg,                  Wnet                                                mv

        #       5 3 11515.42    858.022      1669.79           300.192 4        45,000 kJ/s                              2104.742       1183.96    173.882 4 6  kJ/kg
       mg                                                                      0.1547 3 13138.3

            100.87 kg/s

and

                                                              #          10.1547  2   #         15.6      kg/s
                                                             mv                      mg

    Using these mass flow rate values and specific enthalpies from the table above, the net power developed by the gas tur-
bine and vapor power cycles, respectively, is

                                            #       a100.87       kg      a287.8     kJ b    `  1 MW              `   29.03 MW
                                           Wgas                      b               kg         103 kJ/s

                                                                  s

                                            #       a15.6     kg      a1023.5     kJ b    `  1 MW              `      15.97 MW
                                           Wvap                  b                kg         103 kJ/s

                                                              s

(b) The net rate of exergy increase of the air passing through the combustor is (Eq. 7.36)

                                           #          #         #  3  h3      h2       T01s3          s22 4
                                           Ef3        Ef2      mg

                                                                #  3  h3      h2       T01s°3             s°2        R   ln  p3p22 4
                                                               mg
                                                                                                            9.10 Combined Gas Turbine­Vapor Power Cycle 423

  With assumption 4, we have

                                                                                                         0

                        #          #            #     c  h3    h2      T0 as°3         s°2       R  ln p3 b d
                        Ef3        Ef2         mg                                                     p2

                                               a100.87        kJ b  c  11515.42             669.792   kJ         300  K13.3620              2.50882         kJ        d
                                                              s                                       kg                                                  kg # K

                                                    kJ 1 MW
                                         59,480 s ` 103 kJ/s `  59.48 MW

       The net rate exergy is carried out by the exhaust air stream at 5 is

                                                                                                      0

                        #          #         #     c  h5      h1       T0 as°5         s°1       R  ln p5 b d
                        Ef 5       Ef1      mg                                                        p1

                                            a100.87           kg                       300.192        30011.9919               1.70202   4  a kJ b     `  1 MW           `
                                                                 b 3 1400.98                                                                 kg           103 kJ/s

                                                              s

                                         1.39 MW

       The net rate exergy is carried out as the water passes through the condenser is

                  #           #          #  3  h8         h9      T0 1s8    s92 4
                  Ef 8        Ef9       mv

                                               kg                               173.882 kJ            300 K16.7282                  0.59262      kJ       d     `  1 MW         `
                                        a15.6 b c 12104.74                               kg                                                    kg # K              103 kJ/s

                                                s

                                    1.41 MW

       The rates  of exerg# y  destruction for the air turbine, compressor,                           steam      turbine,       pump,    and   interconnecting                        heat  exchanger
       evaluated  using Ed            #
  are                              T0scv,      respectively,        as    follows:

  Air turbine:

                  #     m# gT01s4           s32
                  Ed

                       m# gT01s°4  s°3  R ln p4p32

                                  kg             1300 K2       c 12.7620           3.36202         kJ          a 8.314       kJ     b  ln   a  100        b  d     `  1 MW         `
                        a100.87 b                                                                kg # K         28.97      kg # K              1200                   103 kJ/s

                                   s

                       3.42 MW

  Compressor:

                                        #          m# gT01s2        s12
                                        Ed

                                                m# gT01s°2  s°1  R ln p2p12

                                                   1100.87213002 c 12.5088                       1.70202         8.314     ln  a1200b d     `   1   `
                                                                                                                 28.97           100           103

                                                2.83 MW

  Steam turbine:

                                                               #        #       1  s8       s72
                                                               Ed      mvT0

                                                                       115.6213002 16.7282                  6.36342     `   1    `
                                                                                                                           103

                                                                    1.71 MW

  Pump:

                                                               #        #       1  s6       s92
                                                               Ed      mvT0

                                                                       115.6213002 10.5975                  0.59262     `   1    `
                                                                                                                           103

                                                                    0.02 MW
424 Chapter 9 Gas Power Systems

Heat exchanger:

#     T0 3 m# g1s5    s42     #  1  s7    s62 4
Ed                           mv

      1300 K2                  kg   11.9919        2.76202    kJ             kg  16.3634    0.59752    kJ    d  `  1 MW      `
                    c a100.87 b                             kg # K    a15.6 b                        kg # K        103 kJ/s

                                s                                             s

     3.68 MW

 The results are summarized by the following exergy rate balance sheet in terms of exergy magnitudes on a rate basis:

    Net exergy increase of the gas passing                          59.48 MW              100%       (70%)*
    through the combustor:
    Disposition of the exergy:                                      29.03 MW              48.8%      (34.2%)
    · Net power developed                                           15.97 MW              26.8%      (18.8%)
                                                                    45.00 MW              75.6%      (53.0%)
      gas turbine cycle
      vapor cycle                                                    1.39 MW               2.3%       (1.6%)
                                                                     1.41 MW               2.4%       (1.7%)
                                            Subtotal
    · Net exergy lost                                                3.42 MW               5.7%       (4.0%)
                                                                     2.83 MW               4.8%       (3.4%)
      with exhaust gas at state 5                                    1.71 MW               2.9%       (2.0%)
      from water passing through condenser                           0.02 MW                --
    · Exergy destruction                                             3.68 MW               6.2%         --
      air turbine                                                                                     (4.3%)
      compressor
      steam turbine
      pump
      heat exchanger

    *Estimation based on fuel exergy. For discussion, see note 2.

    The subtotals given in the table under the net power developed heading indicate that the combined cycle is effective in
generating power from the exergy supplied. The table also indicates the relative significance of the exergy destructions in the
turbines, compressor, pump, and heat exchanger, as well as the relative significance of the exergy losses. Finally, the table
indicates that the total of the exergy destructions overshadows the losses.

 The development of the appropriate expressions for the rates of entropy production in the turbines, compressor, pump, and

    heat exchanger is left as an exercise.

 In this exergy balance sheet, the percentages shown in parentheses are estimates based on the fuel exergy. Although com-

    bustion is the most significant source of irreversibility, the exergy destruction due to combustion cannot be evaluated using
    an air-standard analysis. Calculations of exergy destruction due to combustion (Chap. 13) reveal that approximately 30% of
    the exergy entering the combustor with the fuel would be destroyed, leaving about 70% of the fuel exergy for subsequent
    use. Accordingly, the value 59.48 MW for the net exergy increase of the air passing through the combustor is assumed to be
    70% of the fuel exergy supplied. The other percentages in parentheses are obtained by multiplying the corresponding per-
    centages, based on the exergy increase of the air passing through the combustor, by the factor 0.7. Since they account for
    combustion irreversibility, the table values in parentheses give the more accurate picture of combined cycle performance.

                    9.11 Ericsson and Stirling Cycles

                    Significant increases in the thermal efficiency of gas turbine power plants can be achieved
                    through intercooling, reheat, and regeneration. There is an economic limit to the number of
                    stages that can be employed, and normally there would be no more than two or three. Nonethe-
                    less, it is instructive to consider the situation where the number of stages of both intercool-
                    ing and reheat becomes indefinitely large. Figure 9.24a shows an ideal closed regenerative
                    gas turbine cycle with several stages of compression and expansion and a regenerator whose
                    effectiveness is 100%. Each intercooler is assumed to return the working fluid to the
                                                                                9.11 Ericsson and Stirling Cycles 425

T                3              4  T                            3          4

TH                                 TH

       p=c                                      p=c

                           p=c                                     p=c

TC  2       1                      TC                   1
                                             2

                                s                                       s

            (a)                                         (b)

 Figure 9.24 Ericsson cycle as a limit of ideal gas turbine operation using
multistage compression with intercooling, multistage expansion with reheating,
and regeneration.

temperature TC at the inlet to the first compression stage and each reheater restores the work-    Ericsson cycle
ing fluid to the temperature TH at the inlet to the first turbine stage. The regenerator allows
the heat input for Process 2­3 to be obtained from the heat rejected in Process 4­1. Ac-

cordingly, all the heat added externally would occur in the reheaters, and all the heat rejected

to the surroundings would take place in the intercoolers.

   In the limit, as an infinite number of reheat and intercooler stages is employed, all the heat

added would occur when the working fluid is at its highest temperature, TH, and all the heat
rejected would take place when the working fluid is at its lowest temperature, TC. The limiting
cycle, shown in Fig. 9.24b, is called the Ericsson cycle. Since irreversibilities are presumed

absent and all the heat is supplied and rejected isothermally, the thermal efficiency of the

Ericsson cycle equals that of any reversible power cycle operating with heat addition at the

temperature TH and heat rejection at the temperature TC: hmax  1  TC TH. This expression

was applied previously to evaluate the thermal efficiency of Carnot power cycles. Although the

details of the Ericsson cycle differ from those of the Carnot cycle, both cycles have the same

value of thermal efficiency when operating between the temperatures TH and TC.

STIRLING CYCLE. Another cycle that employs a regenerator is the Stirling cycle, shown on
the p­v and T­s diagrams of Fig. 9.25. The cycle consists of four internally reversible processes
in series: isothermal compression from state 1 to state 2 at temperature TC, constant-volume
heating from state 2 to state 3, isothermal expansion from state 3 to state 4 at temperature TH,
and constant-volume cooling from state 4 to state 1 to complete the cycle. A regenerator whose
effectiveness is 100% allows the heat rejected during Process 4­1 to be used as the heat in-
put in Process 2­3. Accordingly, all the heat added to the working fluid externally would take

p   3                              T

       T=c                                           3             4
                                      TH

                        4                       v=c
    2

       T=c                 TH                                v=c

                 1         TC      TC                        1

                                          2

                                v                                       s

 Figure 9.25 p­v and T­s diagrams of the Stirling cycle.
426 Chapter 9 Gas Power Systems

Stirling engine    place in the isothermal process 3­4 and all the heat rejected to the surroundings would occur
                   in the isothermal process 1­2. It can be concluded, therefore, that the thermal efficiency of
                   the Stirling cycle is given by the same expression as for the Carnot and Ericsson cycles.

                      The Ericsson and Stirling cycles are principally of theoretical interest as examples of cy-
                   cles that exhibit the same thermal efficiency as the Carnot cycle. However, a practical en-
                   gine of the piston­cylinder type that operates on a closed regenerative cycle having features
                   in common with the Stirling cycle has been under study in recent years. This engine is known
                   as Stirling engine. The Stirling engine offers the opportunity for high efficiency together
                   with reduced emissions from combustion products because the combustion takes place ex-
                   ternally and not within the cylinder as for internal combustion engines. In the Stirling en-
                   gine, energy is transferred to the working fluid from products of combustion, which are kept
                   separate. It is an external combustion engine.

compressible flow     COMPRESSIBLE FLOW THROUGH
                      NOZZLES AND DIFFUSERS

                   In many applications of engineering interest, gases move at relatively high velocities and exhibit
                   appreciable changes in density. The flows through the nozzles and diffusers of jet engines dis-
                   cussed in Sec. 9.9 are important examples. Other examples are the flows through wind tunnels,
                   shock tubes, and steam ejectors. These flows are known as compressible flows. In this part of
                   the chapter, we introduce some of the principles involved in analyzing compressible flows.

                   9.12 Compressible Flow Preliminaries

                   Concepts introduced in this section play important roles in the study of compressible flows.
                   The momentum equation is introduced in a form applicable to the analysis of control vol-
                   umes at steady state. The velocity of sound is also defined, and the concepts of Mach num-
                   ber and stagnation state are discussed.

                    9.12.1 Momentum Equation for Steady One-Dimensional Flow

                   The analysis of compressible flows requires the principles of conservation of mass and energy,
                   the second law of thermodynamics, and relations among the thermodynamic properties of the
                   flowing gas. In addition, Newton's second law of motion is required. Application of Newton's
                   second law of motion to systems of fixed mass (closed systems) involves the familiar form

                                                                      F  ma

                   where F is the resultant force acting on a system of mass m and a is the acceleration. The
                   object of the present discussion is to introduce Newton's second law of motion in a form ap-
                   propriate for the study of the control volumes considered in subsequent discussions.

                      Consider the control volume shown in Fig. 9.26, which has a single inlet, designated by 1,
                   and a single exit, designated by 2. The flow is assumed to be one-dimensional at these lo-
                   cations. The energy and entropy rate equations for such a control volume have terms that ac-
                   count for energy and entropy transfers, respectively, at the inlets and exits. Momentum also
                   can be carried into or out of the control volume at the inlets and exits, and such transfers can
                   be accounted for as

                                    time rate of momentum

                                 D  out  transfer into or     T    m# V  (9.30)
                                         of a control volume

                                    accompanying mass flow
                                                                                               9.12 Compressible Flow Preliminaries 427

              1                            z
                                                       y
·  V1                                                     x
m

                                                             2
                                                                        m· V2

                                        no flow through this                    Figure 9.26 One-inlet, one-
                                        portion of the boundary                exit control volume at steady state
                                                                               labeled with momentum transfers
                                                                               accompanying mass flow.

In this expression, the momentum per unit of mass flowing across the boundary of the con-
trol volume is given by the velocity vector V. In accordance with the one-dimensional flow
model, the vector is normal to the inlet or exit and oriented in the direction of flow

   In words, Newton's second law of motion for control volumes is

       time rate of change                 resultant force                     net rate at which momentum is

Ł of momentum contained §  Ł acting on the §  Ł transferred into the control §

within the control volume                  control volume               volume accompanying mass flow

At steady state, the total amount of momentum contained in the control volume is constant
with time. Accordingly, when applying Newton's second law of motion to control volumes
at steady state, it is necessary to consider only the momentum accompanying the incoming
and outgoing streams of matter and the forces acting on the control volume. Newton's law
then states that the resultant force F acting on the control volume equals the difference be-
tween the rates of momentum exiting and entering the control volume accompanying mass
flow. This is expressed by the following momentum equation

                              F          #       #              #  1V2         V12                   (9.31) momentum equation
                                        m2V2    m1V1           m

Since   #      #  at  steady  state,  the  common  mass      flow  is          designated  in  this  expression  sim-
       m#1    m2

ply as m. The resultant force includes the forces due to pressure acting at the inlet and exit,

forces acting on the portion of the boundary through which there is no mass flow, and the

force of gravity. The expression of Newton's second law of motion given by Eq. 9.31 suf-

fices for subsequent discussions. More general control volume formulations are normally

provided in fluid mechanics texts.

 9.12.2 Velocity of Sound and Mach Number

A sound wave is a small pressure disturbance that propagates through a gas, liquid, or solid
at a velocity c that depends on the properties of the medium. In this section we obtain an ex-
pression that relates the velocity of sound, or sonic velocity, to other properties. The veloc-
ity of sound is an important property in the study of compressible flows.

MODELING PRESSURE WAVES. Let us begin by referring to Fig. 9.27a, which shows a
pressure wave moving to the right with a velocity of magnitude c. The wave is generated by
a small displacement of the piston. As shown on the figure, the pressure, density, and tem-
perature in the region to the left of the wave depart from the respective values of the undis-
turbed fluid to the right of the wave, which are designated simply p, , and T. After the wave
has passed, the fluid to its left is in steady motion with a velocity of magnitude V.
428 Chapter 9 Gas Power Systems

                                                                                                                  Observer on
                                                                                                                      wave

Piston                               V           Undisturbed fluid
                                     p + p
                                      +                  V=0                 p + p                       c ­ V
                                     T + T               p, T,                + 
                                                   c                         T + T                                 c
                                                                                                                  p, , T

    Stationary                                                                                           21
     observer
                                                                             Control volume for an
                                                                             observer moving with

                                                                                     the wave

                                            (a)                                                              (b)

 Figure 9.27 Illustrations used to analyze the propagation of a sound wave. (a) Propagation of a
pressure wave through a quiescent fluid, relative to a stationary observer. (b) Observer at rest relative
to the wave.

    Figure 9.27a shows the wave from the point of view of a stationary observer. It is easier

to analyze this situation from the point of view of an observer at rest relative to the wave,

as shown in Fig. 9.27b. By adopting this viewpoint, a steady-state analysis can be applied to

the control volume identified on the figure. To an observer at rest relative to the wave, it ap-

pears as though the fluid is moving toward the stationary wave from the right with velocity

c, pressure p, density , and temperature T and moving away on the left with velocity c  V,

pressure p  p, density   , and temperature T  T.

 #  At steady state, the conservation of mass principle for the control volume reduces to
m1       #
        m2,                      or

                                                 rAc  1r  ˘r2A1c  ˘V2

On rearrangement

                                                                                                      0                        (9.32)

                                                 0  c˘r  r˘V  ˘r˘V

If the disturbance is weak, the third term on the right of Eq. 9.32 can be neglected, leaving

                                                         ˘V  1cr2˘r                                                            (9.33)

   Next, the momentum equation, Eq. 9.31, is applied to the control volume under con-
sideration. Since the thickness of the wave is small, shear forces at the wall are negligi-
ble. The effect of gravity is also ignored. Hence, the only significant forces acting on the
control volume in the direction of flow are the forces due to pressure at the inlet and exit.
With these idealizations, the component of the momentum equation in the direction of flow
reduces to

                                            pA     1p    ˘p2 A        m# 1c    ˘V2                        #
                                                                                                         mc

                                                                     m# 1c  ˘V  c2

                                                                     1rAc21˘V2

or

                                                         ˘p  rc ˘V                                                             (9.34)

Combining Eqs. 9.33 and 9.34 and solving for c

                                                                  ˘p                                                           (9.35)
                                                         c  B ˘r
                                                                                                            9.12 Compressible Flow Preliminaries 429

SOUND WAVES. For all sound waves the differences in pressure, density, and temperature
across the wave are quite small. In particular,   , justifying the neglect of the third
term of Eq. 9.32. Furthermore, the ratio p in Eq. 9.35 can be interpreted as the deriv-
ative of pressure with respect to density across the wave. Experiments also indicate that the
relation between pressure and density across a sound wave is nearly isentropic. The expres-
sion for the velocity of sound then becomes

                                                 0p                                 (9.36a) velocity of sound
                                       c a b

                                            B 0r s

or in terms of specific volume

                                c         v2     a  0p                              (9.36b)
                                       B               b

                                                    0v s

The velocity of sound is an intensive property whose value depends on the state of the medium
through which sound propagates. Although we have assumed that sound propagates isen-
tropically, the medium itself may be undergoing any process.

   Means for evaluating the velocity of sound c for gases, liquids, and solids are introduced
in Sec. 11.5. The special case of an ideal gas will be considered here because it is used
extensively later in the chapter. For this case, the relationship between pressure and specific
volume of an ideal gas at fixed entropy is pvk  constant, where k is the specific heat ratio
(Sec. 6.7). Thus, (0p0v)s  kpv, and Eq. 9.36b gives c  1kpv. Or, with the ideal gas
equation of state

                                c  2kRT 1ideal gas2                                 (9.37)

    for example. . . to illustrate the use of Eq. 9.37, let us calculate the velocity of
sound in air at 300 K and 650 K. From Table A-20 at 300 K, k  1.4. Thus

c       1.4  a  8314            N   #  mb  1300  K2  `  1  kg # m /s2  `    347  m
                28.97           kg  #  K                     1N                  s
     B

At 650 K, k  1.37, and c  506 m /s, as can be verified. 

MACH NUMBER. In subsequent discussions, the ratio of the velocity V at a state in a flow-
ing fluid to the value of the sonic velocity c at the same state plays an important role. This
ratio is called the Mach number M

                                       M         V                                  (9.38) Mach number
                                                 c

When M  1, the flow is said to be supersonic; when M  1, the flow is subsonic; and               supersonic
when M  1, the flow is sonic. The term hypersonic is used for flows with Mach numbers            subsonic
much greater than one, and the term transonic refers to flows where the Mach number is
close to unity.
430 Chapter 9 Gas Power Systems

stagnation state      9.12.3 Determining Stagnation State Properties

                     When dealing with compressible flows, it is often convenient to work with properties eval-
                     uated at a reference state known as the stagnation state. The stagnation state is the state a
                     flowing fluid would attain if it were decelerated to zero velocity isentropically. We might
                     imagine this as taking place in a diffuser operating at steady state. By reducing an energy
                     balance for such a diffuser, it can be concluded that the enthalpy at the stagnation state as-
                     sociated with an actual state in the flow where the specific enthalpy is h and the velocity is
                     V is given by

stagnation enthalpy                                              V2  (9.39)
                                                     ho  h  2
stagnation pressure
and temperature      The enthalpy designated here as ho is called the stagnation enthalpy. The pressure po and
                     temperature To at a stagnation state are called the stagnation pressure and stagnation
                     temperature, respectively.

                     9.13 Analyzing One-Dimensional Steady
                                Flow in Nozzles and Diffusers

                     Although the subject of compressible flow arises in a great many important areas of engi-
                     neering application, the remainder of this presentation is concerned only with flow through
                     nozzles and diffusers. Texts dealing with compressible flow should be consulted for discus-
                     sion of other areas of application.

                         In the present section we determine the shapes required by nozzles and diffusers for sub-
                     sonic and supersonic flow. This is accomplished using mass, energy, entropy, and momen-
                     tum principles, together with property relationships. In addition, we study how the flow
                     through nozzles is affected as conditions at the nozzle exit are changed. The presentation
                     concludes with an analysis of normal shocks, which can exist in supersonic flows.

                      9.13.1 Exploring the Effects of Area Change in Subsonic and
                                       Supersonic Flows

                     The objective of the present discussion is to establish criteria for determining whether a
                     nozzle or diffuser should have a converging, diverging, or converging­diverging shape.
                     This is accomplished using differential equations relating the principal variables that are
                     obtained using mass and energy balances together with property relations, as considered
                     next.

                     GOVERNING DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS. Let us begin by considering a control volume
                     enclosing a nozzle or diffuser. At steady state, the mass flow rate is constant, so

                                                                   rAV  constant

                     In differential form
                                                                                 d1rAV2  0

                                                         AV dr  rA dV  rV dA  0

                     or on dividing each term by AV

                                                     dr  dV  dA  0   (9.40)
                                                     rVA
                                                9.13 Analyzing One-Dimensional Steady Flow in Nozzles and Diffusers 431

                  ##
   Assuming Qcv  Wcv  0 and negligible potential energy effects, an energy rate balance

reduces to give

                                      h2    V22     h1       V  2
                                            2                   1

                                                             2

Introducing Eq. 9.39, it follows that the stagnation enthalpies at states 1 and 2 are equal:
ho2  ho1. Since any state downstream of the inlet can be regarded as state 2, the following
relationship between the specific enthalpy and kinetic energy must be satisfied at each state

                 h                     V2      ho1      (constant)
                                       2

In differential form this becomes

                                           dh  V dV                          (9.41)

This equation shows that if the velocity increases (decreases) in the direction of flow, the
specific enthalpy must decrease (increase) in the direction of flow, and conversely.

   In addition to Eqs. 9.40 and 9.41 expressing conservation of mass and energy, relation-
ships among properties must be taken into consideration. Assuming the flow occurs isen-
tropically, the property relation (Eq. 6.12b)

                                                               dp
                                              Tds  dh 

                                                               r

reduces to give

                                            dh      1                        (9.42)
                                                      dp
                                                    r

This equation shows that when pressure increases or decreases in the direction of flow, the
specific enthalpy changes in the same way.

   Forming the differential of the property relation p  p(, s)

                                           0p             0p
                 dp  a b dr  a b ds
                                           0r s           0s r

The second term vanishes in isentropic flow. Introducing Eq. 9.36a, we have

                                           dp  c2 dr                         (9.43)

which shows that when pressure increases or decreases in the direction of flow, density
changes in the same way.

   Additional conclusions can be drawn by combining the above differential equations. Com-
bining Eqs. 9.41 and 9.42 results in

                                          1 dp  VdV                          (9.44)
                                          r

which shows that if the velocity increases (decreases) in the direction of flow, the pressure
must decrease (increase) in the direction of flow, and conversely.

   Eliminating dp between Eqs. 9.43 and 9.44 and combining the result with Eq. 9.40 gives

                                   dA      dV       c1    a  V    2  d

                                   A           V             c  b
432 Chapter 9 Gas Power Systems

               or with the Mach number M

                                                  dA  dV 11  M22                                   (9.45)
                                                  A  V

throat         VARIATION OF AREA WITH VELOCITY. Equation 9.45 shows how area must vary with ve-
               locity. The following four cases can be identified:

               Case 1: Subsonic nozzle. dV  0, M  1 1 dA  0: The duct converges in the direction
                     of flow.

               Case 2: Supersonic nozzle. dV  0, M  1 1 dA  0: The duct diverges in the direction
                     of flow.

               Case 3: Supersonic diffuser. dV  0, M  1 1 dA  0: The duct converges in the direction
                     of flow.

               Case 4: Subsonic diffuser. dV  0, M  1 1 dA  0: The duct diverges in the direction
                     of flow.

                  The conclusions reached above concerning the nature of the flow in subsonic and super-
               sonic nozzles and diffusers are summarized in Fig. 9.28. From Fig. 9.28a, we see that to ac-
               celerate a fluid flowing subsonically, a converging nozzle must be used, but once M  1 is
               achieved, further acceleration can occur only in a diverging nozzle. From Fig. 9.28b, we see
               that a converging diffuser is required to decelerate a fluid flowing supersonically, but once
               M  1 is achieved, further deceleration can occur only in a diverging diffuser. These findings
               suggest that a Mach number of unity can occur only at the location in a nozzle or diffuser
               where the cross-sectional area is a minimum. This location of minimum area is called the
               throat.

                  The developments of this section have not required the specification of an equation of
               state; thus, the conclusions hold for all gases. Moreover, although the conclusions have been
               drawn under the restriction of isentropic flow through nozzles and diffusers, they are at least
               qualitatively valid for actual flows because the flow through well-designed nozzles and dif-
               fusers is nearly isentropic. Isentropic nozzle efficiencies (Sec. 6.8) in excess of 95% can be
               attained in practice.

back pressure   9.13.2 Effects of Back Pressure on Mass Flow Rate

               In the present discussion we consider the effect of varying the back pressure on the rate of
               mass flow through nozzles. The back pressure is the pressure in the exhaust region outside
               the nozzle. The case of converging nozzles is taken up first and then converging­diverging
               nozzles are considered.

                M<1                      M>1            M>1             M<1
               Subsonic               Supersonic     Supersonic        Subsonic

               Case 1                 Case 2            Case 3         Case 4

                                 (a)                              (b)

                Figure 9.28 Effects of area change in subsonic and supersonic flows. (a) Nozzles:
               V increases; h, p, and r decrease. (b) Diffusers: V decreases h, p, and  increase.
                                                           9.13 Analyzing One-Dimensional Steady Flow in Nozzles and Diffusers 433

CONVERGING NOZZLES. Figure 9.29 shows a converging duct with stagnation condi-

tions    at  the  inlet,  discharging   into    a  region        in  which        the  back  pressure  pB  can    be  varied.
                                                                                                                       #
For the series of cases labeled a through e, let us consider how the mass flow rate m and

nozzle exit pressure pE vary as the back pressure is decreased while keeping the inlet

conditions fixed.                                                 #
                                                                 m
When         pB     pE      po,  there  is  no  flow,  so              0.  This   corresponds  to  case    a  of  Fig.  9.29.

If the back pressure pB is decreased, as in cases b and c, there will be flow through the noz-

zle. As long as the flow is subsonic at the exit, information about changing conditions in the

exhaust region can be transmitted upstream. Decreases in back pressure thus result in greater

mass flow rates and new pressure variations within the nozzle. In each instance, the veloc-

ity is subsonic throughout the nozzle and the exit pressure equals the back pressure. The exit

Mach number increases as pB decreases, however, and eventually a Mach number of unity
will be attained at the nozzle exit. The corresponding pressure is denoted by p*, called the

critical pressure. This case is represented by d on Fig. 9.29.

Recalling that the Mach number cannot increase beyond unity in a converging section, let

us consider next what happens when the back pressure is reduced further to a value less than

p*, such as represented by case e. Since the velocity at the exit equals the velocity of sound,

information about changing conditions in the exhaust region no longer can be transmitted

upstream past the exit plane. Accordingly, reductions in pB below p* have no effect on flow
conditions in the nozzle. Neither the pressure variation within the nozzle nor the mass flow

rate is affected. Under these conditions, the nozzle is said to be choked. When a nozzle is                                    choked flow:
                                                                                                                               converging nozzle
choked, the mass flow rate is the maximum possible for the given stagnation conditions. For

pB less than p*, the flow expands outside the nozzle to match the lower back pressure, as
shown by case e of Fig. 9.29. The pressure variation outside the nozzle cannot be predicted

using the one-dimensional flow model.

                                        Valve to adjust
                                        back pressure

V0                                          pE         pB
po, To
                            Exhaust region
        p
                                                 a
                                                 b
                                             cd

                                                              e

·            d                                  pE                             a
m                 c                              po                        cb

      e                                         1.0                  d

                                                p*
                                                 po e

                        b                                                  1.0 pB       Figure 9.29 Effect of
                                                                                  po   back pressure on the operation
                     a                                                                 of a converging nozzle.
                     1.0 pB

                            po
434 Chapter 9 Gas Power Systems

                                      Throat                              Exhaust region

                      V0                                      pE    pB
                      po, To

                                                                          Valve to adjust
                                                                          back pressure

                                                              ab

                      p                                          c

                                                               d
                                                              e

                                 p*                           f
                                 M=1
                                                      Normal

                                                      shock         g

                                                                    h

                                              Normal          i
                                               shock                   j

                       Figure 9.30 Effect of back pressure on the operation of a converging­
                      diverging nozzle.

choked flow:          CONVERGING­DIVERGING NOZZLES. Figure 9.30 illustrates the effects of varying back
converging­diverging  pressure on a converging­diverging nozzle. The series of cases labeled a through j is con-
nozzle                sidered next.

normal shock           Let us first discuss the cases designated a, b, c, and d. Case a corresponds to pB 
                         pE  po for which there is no flow. When the back pressure is slightly less than po
                         (case b), there is some flow, and the flow is subsonic throughout the nozzle. In accor-
                         dance with the discussion of Fig. 9.28, the greatest velocity and lowest pressure occur at
                         the throat, and the diverging portion acts as a diffuser in which pressure increases and
                         velocity decreases in the direction of flow. If the back pressure is reduced further, corre-
                         sponding to case c, the mass flow rate and velocity at the throat are greater than before.
                         Still, the flow remains subsonic throughout and qualitatively the same as case b. As the
                         back pressure is reduced, the Mach number at the throat increases, and eventually a
                         Mach number of unity is attained there (case d). As before, the greatest velocity and
                         lowest pressure occur at the throat, and the diverging portion remains a subsonic
                         diffuser. However, because the throat velocity is sonic, the nozzle is now choked: The
                         maximum mass flow rate has been attained for the given stagnation conditions. Further
                         reductions in back pressure cannot result in an increase in the mass flow rate.

                       When the back pressure is reduced below that corresponding to case d, the flow through
                         the converging portion and at the throat remains unchanged. Conditions within the di-
                         verging portion can be altered, however, as illustrated by cases e, f, and g. In case e, the
                         fluid passing the throat continues to expand and becomes supersonic in the diverging
                         portion just downstream of the throat; but at a certain location an abrupt change in
                         properties occurs. This is called a normal shock. Across the shock, there is a rapid and
                         irreversible increase in pressure, accompanied by a rapid decrease from supersonic to
                         subsonic flow. Downstream of the shock, the diverging duct acts as a subsonic diffuser
                         in which the fluid continues to decelerate and the pressure increases to match the back
                         pressure imposed at the exit. If the back pressure is reduced further (case f), the loca-
                         tion of the shock moves downstream, but the flow remains qualitatively the same as in
                                                               9.13 Analyzing One-Dimensional Steady Flow in Nozzles and Diffusers 435

   case e. With further reductions in back pressure, the shock location moves farther down-
   stream of the throat until it stands at the exit (case g). In this case, the flow throughout
   the nozzle is isentropic, with subsonic flow in the converging portion, M  1 at the
   throat, and supersonic flow in the diverging portion. Since the fluid leaving the nozzle
   passes through a shock, it is subsonic just downstream of the exit plane.

 Finally, let us consider cases h, i, and j where the back pressure is less than that corre-
   sponding to case g. In each of these cases, the flow through the nozzle is not affected.
   The adjustment to changing back pressure occurs outside the nozzle. In case h, the pres-
   sure decreases continuously as the fluid expands isentropically through the nozzle and
   then increases to the back pressure outside the nozzle. The compression that occurs out-
   side the nozzle involves oblique shock waves. In case i, the fluid expands isentropically
   to the back pressure and no shocks occur within or outside the nozzle. In case j, the
   fluid expands isentropically through the nozzle and then expands outside the nozzle to
   the back pressure through oblique expansion waves. Once M  1 is achieved at the
   throat, the mass flow rate is fixed at the maximum value for the given stagnation
   conditions, so the mass flow rate is the same for back pressures corresponding to cases
   d through j. The pressure variations outside the nozzle involving oblique waves cannot
   be predicted using the one-dimensional flow model.

 9.13.3 Flow Across a Normal Shock

We have seen that under certain conditions a rapid and abrupt change of state called a shock
takes place in the diverging portion of a supersonic nozzle. In a normal shock, this change
of state occurs across a plane normal to the direction of flow. The object of the present dis-
cussion is to develop means for determining the change of state across a normal shock.

MODELING NORMAL SHOCKS. A control volume enclosing a norma# l shock i# s shown in
Fig. 9.31. The control volume is assumed to be at steady state with Wcv  0, Qcv  0 and
negligible effects of potential energy. The thickness of the shock is very small (on the order of
105 cm). Thus, there is no significant change in flow area across the shock, even though it may

occur in a diverging passage, and the forces acting at the wall can be neglected relative to the

pressure forces acting at the upstream and downstream locations denoted by x and y, respectively.

   The upstream and downstream states are related by the following equations:

Mass:

               rxVx  ryVy          (9.46)

Energy:

           hx    Vx2    hy    V2y  (9.47a)
                 2            2

or

                 hox  hoy          (9.47b)

Momentum:

           px  py  ryV2y  rxV2x    (9.48)

Entropy:

           sy  sx  s# cvm#         (9.49)

When combined with property relations for the particular fluid under consideration,
Eqs. 9.46, 9.47, and 9.48 allow the downstream conditions to be determined for specified
upstream conditions. Equation 9.49, which corresponds to Eq. 6.41, leads to the important
436 Chapter 9 Gas Power Systems

                                                       h                   hoy        hox = hoy
                                                            hox         poy Vy2        b
                                                           pox
                                                                                 2
                                                                 Vx2
                                                                  2            y
                                                                                   a

                                                                                      Rayleigh line

                                    Normal shock

                                                                                      Fanno line

                                 x  y                                x  M = 1 at a and b
                                                       hx               M < 1 on upper branches
               Vx, Mx, Tx, px          Vy, My, Ty, py                   M > 1 on lower branches
                    hx, sx                   hy, sy
                                                                                                        s

                Figure 9.31 Control volume              Figure 9.32 Intersection of Fanno and
               enclosing a normal shock.               Rayleigh lines as a solution to the normal shock
                                                       equations.

Fanno line     conclusion that the downstream state must have greater specific entropy than the upstream
Rayleigh line  state, or sy  sx.

               FANNO AND RAYLEIGH LINES. The mass and energy equations, Eqs. 9.46 and 9.47, can
               be combined with property relations for the particular fluid to give an equation that when
               plotted on an h­s diagram is called a Fanno line. Similarly, the mass and momentum equa-
               tions, Eqs. 9.46 and 9.48, can be combined to give an equation that when plotted on an h­s
               diagram is called a Rayleigh line. Fanno and Rayleigh lines are sketched on h­s coordinates
               in Fig. 9.32. It can be shown that the point of maximum entropy on each line, points a and
               b, corresponds to M  1. It also can be shown that the upper and lower branches of each
               line correspond, respectively, to subsonic and supersonic velocities.

                  The downstream state y must satisfy the mass, energy, and momentum equations simul-
               taneously, so state y is fixed by the intersection of the Fanno and Rayleigh lines passing
               through state x. Since sy  sx, it can be concluded that the flow across the shock can only
               pass from x to y. Accordingly, the velocity changes from supersonic before the shock (Mx  1)
               to subsonic after the shock (My  1). This conclusion is consistent with the discussion of
               cases e, f, and g in Fig. 9.30. A significant increase in pressure across the shock accompa-
               nies the decrease in velocity. Figure 9.32 also locates the stagnation states corresponding to
               the states upstream and downstream of the shock. The stagnation enthalpy does not change
               across the shock, but there is a marked decrease in stagnation pressure associated with the
               irreversible process occurring in the normal shock region.

               9.14 Flow in Nozzles and Diffusers of Ideal
                          Gases with Constant Specific Heats

               The discussion of flow in nozzles and diffusers presented in Sec. 9.13 requires no
               assumption regarding the equation of state, and therefore the results obtained hold gen-
               erally. Attention is now restricted to ideal gases with constant specific heats. This case is
                                                   9.14 Flow in Nozzles and Diffusers of Ideal Gases with Constant Specific Heats 437

appropriate for many practical problems involving flow through nozzles and diffusers.
The assumption of constant specific heats also allows the derivation of relatively simple
closed-form equations.

ISENTROPIC FLOW FUNCTIONS. Let us begin by developing equations relating a state in
a compressible flow to the corresponding stagnation state. For the case of an ideal gas with
constant cp, Eq. 9.39 becomes

                                      To     T        V2
                                                      2cp

where To is the stagnation temperature. Introducing cp  kR(k  1), together with Eqs. 9.37
and 9.38, the relation between the temperature T and the Mach number M of the flowing gas
and the corresponding stagnation temperature To is

                                   To  1  k  1 M2                                     (9.50)
                                   T               2

With Eq. 6.45, a relationship between the temperature T and pressure p of the flowing gas

and the corresponding stagnation temperature To and the stagnation pressure po is

                                      po       To   k  1k    12

                                            a      b
                                      pT

Introducing Eq. 9.50 into this expression gives

                             po             k      1          k  1k     12
                             p                 2
                                   a1                  M   2b                         (9.51)

   Although sonic conditions may not actually be attained in a particular flow, it is conven-
ient to have an expression relating the area A at a given section to the area A* that would be
required for sonic flow (M  1) at the same mass flow rate and stagnation state. These areas
are related through

                                   rAV  r*A*V*

where * and V* are the density and velocity, respectively, when M  1. Introducing the
ideal gas equation of state, together with Eqs. 9.37 and 9.38, and solving for AA*

                    A     1  p*      T 12          1   p*po             TTo     1  2
                    A*    M  p     ab              M   ppo              T *To
                                                                     a         b
                                    T*

where T* and p* are the temperature and pressure, respectively, when M  1. Then with

Eqs. 9.50 and 9.51

                    A     1  ca    2   b a1        k       1 M 2b d 1k1221k12         (9.52)
                    A*    M     k     1               2

The variation of AA* with M is given in Fig. 9.33 for k  1.4. The figure shows that a
unique value of AA* corresponds to any choice of M. However, for a given value of AA*
other than unity, there are two possible values for the Mach number, one subsonic and one
supersonic. This is consistent with the discussion of Fig. 9.28, where it was found that a
converging­diverging passage with a section of minimum area is required to accelerate a
flow from subsonic to supersonic velocity.
438 Chapter 9 Gas Power Systems          TABLE 9.1 Isentropic Flow Functions for an Ideal Gas
                                         with k  1.4
     3.0
                                         M     TTo       ppo       AA*
     2.5
                                         0     1.000 00  1.000 00     
     2.0                                                           5.8218
A                                        0.10  0.998 00  0.993 03  2.9635
A* 1.5                                                             2.0351
                                         0.20  0.992 06  0.972 50  1.5901
     1.0                                                           1.3398
                                         0.30  0.982 32  0.939 47  1.1882
     0.5                                                           1.094 37
                                         0.40  0.968 99  0.895 62  1.038 23
       0                                                           1.008 86
         0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0       0.50  0.952 38  0.843 02  1.000 00
                                                                   1.007 93
                                    M    0.60  0.932 84  0.784 00  1.030 44
 Figure 9.33 Variation of AA* with Mach                            1.066 31
number in isentropic flow for k  1.4.    0.70  0.910 75  0.720 92  1.1149
                                                                   1.1762
                                         0.80  0.886 52  0.656 02  1.2502
                                                                   1.3376
                                         0.90  0.860 58  0.591 26  1.4390
                                                                   1.5552
                                         1.00  0.833 33  0.528 28  1.6875
                                                                   1.8369
                                         1.10  0.805 15  0.468 35  2.0050
                                                                   2.1931
                                         1.20  0.776 40  0.412 38  2.4031

                                         1.30  0.747 38  0.360 92

                                         1.40  0.718 39  0.314 24

                                         1.50  0.689 65  0.272 40

                                         1.60  0.661 38  0.235 27

                                         1.70  0.633 72  0.202 59

                                         1.80  0.606 80  0.174 04

                                         1.90  0.580 72  0.149 24

                                         2.00  0.555 56  0.127 80

                                         2.10  0.531 35  0.109 35

                                         2.20  0.508 13  0.093 52

                                         2.30  0.485 91  0.079 97

                                         2.40  0.464 68  0.068 40

                                Equations 9.50, 9.51, and 9.52 allow the ratios TTo, ppo, and AA* to be computed
                             and tabulated with the Mach number as the single independent variable for a specified
                             value of k. Table 9.1 provides a tabulation of this kind for k  1.4. Such a table facili-
                             tates the analysis of flow through nozzles and diffusers. Equations 9.50, 9.51, and 9.52
                             also can be readily evaluated using calculators and computer software such as Interactive
                             Thermodynamics: IT.

                                In Example 9.14, we consider the effect of back pressure on flow in a converging nozzle.
                             The first step of the analysis is to check whether the flow is choked.

E X A M P L E 9 . 1 4 Effect of Back Pressure: Converging Nozzle

A converging nozzle has an exit area of 0.001 m2. Air enters the nozzle with negligible velocity at a pressure of 1.0 MPa and
a temperature of 360 K. For isentropic flow of an ideal gas with k  1.4, determine the mass flow rate, in kg/s, and the exit
Mach number for back pressures of (a) 500 kPa and (b) 784 kPa.

SOLUTION
Known: Air flows isentropically from specified stagnation conditions through a converging nozzle with a known exit area.
Find: For back pressures of 500 and 784 kPa, determine the mass flow rate, in kg/s, and the exit Mach number.
                               9.14 Flow in Nozzles and Diffusers of Ideal Gases with Constant Specific Heats 439

Schematic and Given Data:

                                                  T                    1 po                           T                      po
                                                                                                                    1
          1                                                                            To
V1  0                                                                                                                            To
                   2                                                2 p2 = p* = 528 kPa
                     A2 = 0.001 m2                                          pB = 500 kPa                                  pB = p2 =
                                                                                                                          784 kPa
                                                                                                                    2

                                                                                                                      p* = 528 kPa

T1 = To = 360 K                                                                                s                           s          Figure E9.14
p1 = po = 1.0 MPa

Assumptions:

     1. The control volume shown in the accompanying sketch operates at steady state.
     2. The air is modeled as an ideal gas with k  1.4.
     3. Flow through the nozzle is isentropic.

     Analysis: The first step is to check whether the flow is choked. With k  1.4 and M  1.0, Eq. 9.51 gives p*po  0.528.

 Since po  1.0 MPa, the critical pressure is p*  528 kPa. Thus, for back pressures of 528 kPa or less, the Mach number is

     unity at the exit and the nozzle is choked.

     (a) From the above discussion, it follows that for a back pressure of 500 kPa, the nozzle is choked. At the exit, M2  1.0 and
     the exit pressure equals the critical pressure, p2  528 kPa. The mass flow rate is the maximum value that can be attained for
     the given stagnation properties. With the ideal gas equation of state, the mass flow rate is

                                                     #          r2A2V2            p2       A2V2
                                                    m                            RT2

The exit area A2 required by this expression is specified as 103 m2. Since M  1 at the exit, the exit temperature T2 can be
found from Eq. 9.50, which on rearrangement gives

                               T2                 To    1 M2                       360 K                      300   K
                                                 k                               a 1.4  1 b 1122
                                     1                                 1     
                                                  2                                       2

Then, with Eq. 9.37, the exit velocity V2 is

                           V2  2kRT2

                                   1.4        a  8314   N    #  m   b  1300 K2         `  1 kg # m /s2   `   347.2 m/s
                                                 28.97  kg   #  K
                               B                                                               1N

Finally

                            #      1528          103    N/m22 1103           m22 1347.2           m /s2       2.13  kg /s
                           m
                                                  a 8314        N   #  m
                                                   28.97        kg  #  K  b  1300      K2

(b) Since the back pressure of 784 kPa is greater than the critical pressure determined above, the flow throughout the nozzle
is subsonic and the exit pressure equals the back pressure, p2  784 kPa. The exit Mach number can be found by solving
Eq. 9.51 to obtain

                                                             2               po    1k     12k           12
                                                             
                                              M2        e       1      c  a  p2  b                1d  f
                                                          k
440 Chapter 9 Gas Power Systems

Inserting values

                       M2            e      2  1  c  a   1  106      0.286     1d    12        0.6
                                        1.4             7.84  105
                                                                   b               f

With the exit Mach number known, the exit temperature T2 can be found from Eq. 9.50 as 336 K. The exit velocity is then

                                               M2 2kRT2                        8314
                       V2            M2c2                    0.6   B 1.4       ab           13362
                                                                                28.97

                                  220.5 m/s

The mass flow rate is

                        #          r2A2V2       p2   A2V2    1784  1032 11032 1220.52
                       m                       RT2
                                                                1 831428.972 13362

                                  1.79 kg/s

 The use of Table 9.1 reduces some of the computation required in the solution. It is left as an exercise to develop a

    solution using this table. Also, observe that the first step of the analysis is to check whether the flow is choked.

                       NORMAL SHOCK FUNCTIONS. Next, let us develop closed-form equations for normal
                       shocks for the case of an ideal gas with constant specific heats. For this case, it follows from
                       the energy equation, Eq. 9.47b, that there is no change in stagnation temperature across the
                       shock, Tox  Toy. Then, with Eq. 9.50, the following expression for the ratio of temperatures
                       across the shock is obtained

                                                                            1      k     1 Mx2
                                                                                      2
                                                             Ty                                     (9.53)

                                                             Tx             1      k     1 My2
                                                                                      2

                          Rearranging Eq. 9.48
                                                                px  rxV2x  py  ryVy2

                       Introducing the ideal gas equation of state, together with Eqs. 9.37 and 9.38, the ratio of the
                       pressure downstream of the shock to the pressure upstream is

                                                                      py       1      kM    2       (9.54)
                                                                      px       1            x

                                                                                      kM    2
                                                                                            y

                       Similarly, Eq. 9.46 becomes

                                                                      py  Ty Mx
                                                                      px B Tx My
                       The following equation relating the Mach numbers Mx and My across the shock can be ob-
                       tained when Eqs. 9.53 and 9.54 are introduced in this expression

                                                                            M  2      k  2     1
                                                                               x         

                                                             M     2           2k                   (9.55)
                                                                   y           

                                                                            k      1  M  2     1
                                                                                         x
                            9.14 Flow in Nozzles and Diffusers of Ideal Gases with Constant Specific Heats 441

TABLE 9.2 Normal Shock Functions for an Ideal Gas with
k  1.4

Mx     My        pypx              TyTx         poypox

 1.00  1.000 00     1.0000       1.0000        1.000 00
 1.10  0.911 77     1.2450       1.0649        0.998 92
 1.20  0.842 17     1.5133       1.1280        0.992 80
 1.30  0.785 96     1.8050       1.1909        0.979 35
 1.40  0.739 71     2.1200       1.2547        0.958 19
 1.50  0.701 09     2.4583       1.3202        0.929 78
 1.60  0.668 44     2.8201       1.3880        0.895 20
 1.70  0.640 55     3.2050       1.4583        0.855 73
 1.80  0.616 50     3.6133       1.5316        0.812 68
 1.90  0.595 62     4.0450       1.6079        0.767 35
 2.00  0.577 35     4.5000       1.6875        0.720 88
 2.10  0.561 28     4.9784       1.7704        0.674 22
 2.20  0.547 06     5.4800       1.8569        0.628 12
 2.30  0.534 41     6.0050       1.9468        0.583 31
 2.40  0.523 12     6.5533       2.0403        0.540 15
 2.50  0.512 99     7.1250       2.1375        0.499 02
 2.60  0.503 87     7.7200       2.2383        0.460 12
 2.70  0.495 63     8.3383       2.3429        0.423 59
 2.80  0.488 17     8.9800       2.4512        0.389 46
 2.90  0.481 38     9.6450       2.5632        0.357 73
 3.00  0.475 19   10.333         2.6790        0.328 34
 4.00  0.434 96   18.500         4.0469        0.138 76
 5.00  0.415 23   29.000         5.8000        0.061 72
10.00  0.387 57  116.50         20.388         0.003 04
       0.377 96                                0.0
                                   

   The ratio of stagnation pressures across a shock poypox is often useful. It is left as an
exercise to show that

                                   1     k     1 My2    1k12 21k12
                                            2
                 poy        Mx  ±                                                 (9.56)

                 pox        My     1     k     1 Mx2
                                            2

Since there is no area change across a shock, Eqs. 9.52 and 9.56 combine to give

                                      A*x  poy                                    (9.57)
                                      A*y pox

   For specified values of Mx and specific heat ratio k, the Mach number downstream of a
shock can be found from Eq. 9.55. Then, with Mx, My, and k known, the ratios TyTx, pypx,
and poypox can be determined from Eqs. 9.53, 9.54, and 9.56. Accordingly, tables can be set
up giving My, TyTx, pypx, and poypox versus the Mach number Mx as the single independ-
ent variable for a specified value of k. Table 9.2 is a tabulation of this kind for k  1.4.

   In the next example, we consider the effect of back pressure on flow in a

converging­diverging nozzle. Key elements of the analysis include determining whether the

flow is choked and if a normal shock exists.
 442 Chapter 9 Gas Power Systems

     E X A M P L E 9 . 1 5 Effect of Back Pressure: Converging­Diverging Nozzle

     A converging­diverging nozzle operating at steady state has a throat area of 6.25 cm2 and an exit area of 15 cm2. Air enters
     the nozzle with a negligible velocity at a pressure of 6.8 bars and a temperature of 280 K. For air as an ideal gas with k 
     1.4, determine the mass flow rate, in kg/s, the exit pressure, in bars, and exit Mach number for each of the five following

 cases. (a) Isentropic flow with M  0.7 at the throat. (b) Isentropic flow with M  1 at the throat and the diverging portion

     acting as a diffuser. (c) Isentropic flow with M  1 at the throat and the diverging portion acting as a nozzle. (d) Isentropic
     flow through the nozzle with a normal shock standing at the exit. (e) A normal shock stands in the diverging section at a
     location where the area is 12.5 cm2. Elsewhere in the nozzle, the flow is isentropic.

     SOLUTION
     Known: Air flows from specified stagnation conditions through a converging­diverging nozzle having a known throat and
     exit area.

     Find: The mass flow rate, exit pressure, and exit Mach number are to be determined for each of five cases.

     Schematic and Given Data:

      V1  0                                        A2 = 15 cm2
                                                  2
   p1 = po = 6.8 bars

   T1 = To = 280 K     1  At = 6.25 cm3

T  1 po = 6.8 bars           T           1 po = 6.8 bars
                                                 To = 280 K
      To = 280 K
                                           2 p2 = 6.48 bars
   2 p2 = 6.52 bars                                                          Assumptions:
                                                 pt = p*
        pt                                Mt = 1                             1. The control volume shown in the accom-
   Mt = 0.7                                                                  panying sketch operates at steady state. The
                                                                             T­s diagrams provided locate states within
                                                                             the nozzle.

      Case (a)            s                   Case (b)            s          2. The air is modeled as an ideal gas with
                                                                             k  1.4.

                                         Stagnation state Stagnation state   3. Flow through the nozzle is isentropic

T                            T associated with associated with               throughout, except for case e, where a shock

   1 po = 6.8 bars                       state x               state y

                                                                             stands in the diverging section.

      To = 280 K                         pox 1          poy 2     p2

       pt = p*                                                 y
   Mt = 1
                                                               Sonic state
                                                               associated
                                                               with state y

                                         x              Normal shock

                                Sonic state

      p2 = 0.465 bars           associated

   2                            with state x

   Cases (c) and (d)      s                   Case (e)            s

                                                                              Figure E9.15
                             9.14 Flow in Nozzles and Diffusers of Ideal Gases with Constant Specific Heats 443

Analysis:

(a) The accompanying T­s diagram shows the states visited by the gas in this case. The following are known: the Mach num-
ber at the throat, Mt  0.7, the throat area, At  6.25 cm2, and the exit area, 15 cm2. The exit Mach number M2, exit tem-
perature T2, and exit pressure p2 can be determined using the identity

                                                     A2  A2 At
                                                     A* At A*

With Mt  0.7, Table 9.1 gives AtA*  1.09437. Thus

                                      A2      a   15 cm2    b  11.094372    2.6265
                                      A*         6.25 cm2

The flow throughout the nozzle, including the exit, is subsonic. Accordingly, with this value for A2A*, Table 9.1 gives M2 
0.24. For M2  0.24, T2To  0.988, and p2po  0.959. Since the stagnation temperature and pressure are 280 K and 6.8 bars,
respectively, it follows that T2  277K and p2  6.52 bars.

    The velocity at the exit is

                       V2  M2c2  M2 2kRT2

                       v2    0.24  B  1.4  a  8.314    kJ     b  1277 K2  1 kg # m /s2  `  `  103 N # m  `
                                              28.97  kg # °K              `                      1 kJ

                                                                               1N

                       v2  80.1 m /s

The mass flow rate is

                              #       r2A2V2          p2  A2V2
                             m                       RT2

                                      16.52 bars2 115 cm22 180.1 m/s2      0.985 kg/s

                                           a    8.314 kJ    b  1277°K2
                                              28.97 kg # K

(b) The accompanying T­s diagram shows the states visited by the gas in this case. Since M  1 at the throat, we have At 
A*, and thus A2A*  2.4. Table 9.1 gives two Mach numbers for this ratio: M  0.26 and M  2.4. The diverging portion
acts as a diffuser in the present part of the example; accordingly, the subsonic value is appropriate. The supersonic value is

appropriate in part (c).
    Thus, from Table 9.1 we have at M2  0.26, T2To  0.986, and p2po  0.953. Since To  280 K and po  6.8 bars, it

follows that T2  276K and p2  6.48 bars.
    The velocity at the exit is

                             V2  M2c2  M2 2kRT2

                                    0.26 11.42 a 8.314 b 12762 11032  86.58 m /s
                                              B      28.97

The mass flow rate is

                              #        p2  A2V2      16.482 1152 186.582    1.062 kg/s
                             m        RT2             a8.314 b 12762

                                                          28.97

This is the maximum mass flow rate for the specified geometry and stagnation conditions: the flow is choked.

(c) The accompanying T­s diagram shows the states visited by the gas in this case. As discussed in part (b), the exit Mach
number in the present part of the example is M2  2.4. Using this, Table 9.1 gives p2po  0.0684. With po  6.8 bars, the
pressure at the exit is p2  0.465 bars. Since the nozzle is choked, the mass flow rate is the same as found in part (b).

(d) Since a normal shock stands at the exit and the flow upstream of the shock is isentropic, the Mach number Mx and the
pressure px correspond to the values found in part (c), Mx  2.4, px  0.465 bars. Then, from Table 9.2, My  0.52 and
pypx  6.5533. The pressure downstream of the shock is thus 3.047 bars. This is the exit pressure. The mass flow is the same
as found in part (b).
444 Chapter 9 Gas Power Systems

(e) The accompanying T­s diagram shows the states visited by the gas. It is known that a shock stands in the diverging por-
tion where the area is Ax  12.5 cm2 Since a shock occurs, the flow is sonic at the throat, so A*x  At  6.25 cm2 The Mach

number Mx can then be found from Table 9.1, by using AxA*x  2, as Mx  2.2.

    The Mach number at the exit can be determined using the identity

                                                       A2  a A2 b a A*x b
                                                       A*y A*x A*y

Introducing Eq. 9.57 to replace A*x A*y , this becomes

                                                        A2  a A2 b a poy b
                                                       A*y        A*x pox

where pox and poy are the stagnation pressures before and after the shock, respectively. With Mx  2.2, the ratio of stagnation
pressures is obtained from Table 9.2 as poypox  0.62812. Thus

                                          A2        a   15 cm2    b  10.628122        1.51
                                          A*y          6.25 cm2

Using this ratio and noting that the flow is subsonic after the shock, Table 9.1 gives M2  0.43, for which p2poy  0.88.
    The pressure at the exit can be determined using the identity

p2                               a  p2 b  a  poy b  pox     1 0.88 2 1 0.628 2  16.8  bars2    3.76  bars
                                    poy      pox

Since the flow is choked, the mass flow rate is the same as that found in part (b).

 Part (a) of the present example corresponds to the cases labeled b and c on Fig. 9.30 Part (c) corresponds to case d of

    Fig. 9.30. Part (d) corresponds to case g of Fig. 9.30 and part (e) corresponds to cases e and f.

Chapter Summary and Study Guide

In this chapter, we have studied the thermodynamic model-            tions related to gas turbines are also considered, including
ing of internal combustion engines, gas turbine power plants,        aircraft propulsion systems and combined gas turbine­vapor
and compressible flow in nozzles and diffusers. The modeling         power cycles. In addition, the Ericsson and Stirling cycles
of cycles is based on the use of air-standard analysis, where        are introduced.
the working fluid is considered to be air as an ideal gas.
                                                                        The chapter concludes with the study of compressible flow
   The processes in internal combustion engines are de-              through nozzles and diffusers. We begin by introducing the
scribed in terms of three air-standard cycles: the Otto, Diesel,     momentum equation for steady, one-dimensional flow, the
and dual cycles, which differ from each other only in the            velocity of sound, and the stagnation state. We then consider
way the heat addition process is modeled. For these cycles,          the effects of area change and back pressure on performance
we have evaluated the principal work and heat transfers              in both subsonic and supersonic flows. Choked flow and the
along with two important performance parameters: the mean            presence of normal shocks in such flows are investigated. Ta-
effective pressure and the thermal efficiency. The effect of         bles are introduced to facilitate analysis for the case of ideal
varying compression ratio on cycle performance is also               gases with constant specific heat ratio, k  1.4.
investigated.
                                                                        The following list provides a study guide for this chapter.
   The performance of simple gas turbine power plants is             When your study of the text and end-of-chapter exercises has
described in terms of the air-standard Brayton cycle. For this       been completed, you should be able to
cycle, we evaluate the principal work and heat transfers
along with two important performance parameters: the back-            write out the meanings of the terms listed in the margin
work ratio and the thermal efficiency. We also consider the             throughout the chapter and understand each of the re-
effects on performance of irreversibilities and of varying              lated concepts. The subset of key concepts listed below
compressor pressure ratio. Three modifications of the sim-              is particularly important.
ple cycle to improve performance are introduced: regenera-
tion, reheat, and compression with intercooling. Applica-             sketch p­v and T­s diagrams of the Otto, Diesel, and
                                                                        dual cycles. Apply the closed system energy balance and
                                                                    Problems: Developing Engineering Skills 445

   the second law along with property data to determine the          analyze the performance of gas turbine­related applica-
   performance of these cycles, including mean effective               tions involving aircraft propulsion and combined gas
   pressure, thermal efficiency, and the effects of varying            turbine­vapor power plants. You also should be able to
   compression ratio.                                                  apply the principles of this chapter to Ericsson and
                                                                       Stirling cycles.
 sketch schematic diagrams and accompanying T­s dia-
   grams of the Brayton cycle and modifications involving            discuss for nozzles and diffusers the effects of area
   regeneration, reheat, and compression with intercooling.            change in subsonic and supersonic flows, the effects of
   In each case, be able to apply mass and energy balances,            back pressure on mass flow rate, and the appearance and
   the second law, and property data to determine gas tur-             consequences of choking and normal shocks.
   bine power cycle performance, including thermal effi-
   ciency, back-work ratio, net power output, and the effects        analyze the flow in nozzles and diffusers of ideal gases
   of varying compressor pressure ratio.                               with constant specific heats, as in Examples 9.14 and
                                                                       9.15.

Key Engineering Concepts

mean effective           dual cycle p. 385                          momentum                  stagnation state p. 430
   pressure p. 375       Brayton cycle p. 390                          equation p. 427        choked flow p. 433, 434
                         regenerator                                                          normal shock p. 434
air-standard                                                        velocity of sound p. 429
   analysis p. 375, 388     effectiveness p. 401                    Mach number p. 429
                         turbojet engine p. 414                     subsonic and supersonic
Otto cycle p. 375        combined cycle p. 419
Diesel cycle p. 381                                                    flow p. 429

Exercises: Things Engineers Think About

1. How do the events occurring within the cylinders of actual in-   8. What is the overall thermal efficiency of the combined cycle
ternal combustion engines depart from the air-standard analysis     of Example 9.13? What is the overall exergetic efficiency based
of Sec. 9.1?                                                        on exergy entering the combustor with the fuel?

2. In a brochure, you read that a car has a 2-liter engine. What    9. The air entering a turbojet engine experiences a pressure
does this mean?                                                     increase as it flows through the diffuser and another pressure
                                                                    increase as it flows through the compressor. How are these pres-
3. A car magazine says that your car's engine has more power        sure increases achieved?
when the ambient temperature is low. Do you agree?
                                                                    10. How would the T­s diagram of Fig. 9.20 appear if frictional
4. When operating at high elevations, cars can lose power. Why?     effects for flow through the diffuser, compressor, turbine, and
                                                                    nozzle were considered?
5. Why are the external surfaces of a lawn mower engine cov-
ered with fins?                                                     11. How do internal and external combustion engines differ?

6. Using Eq. 6.53b, show that for a given pressure rise a gas tur-  12. In which of the following media is the sonic velocity the
bine compressor would require a much greater work input per         greatest: air, steel, or water? Does sound propagate in a vacuum?
unit of mass flow than would the pump of a vapor power plant.
                                                                    13. Can a shock stand upstream of the throat of a converging­
7. The ideal Brayton and Rankine cycles are composed of the         diverging nozzle?
same four processes, yet look different when represented on a
T­s diagram. Explain.

Problems: Developing Engineering Skills

Otto, Diesel and Dual Cycles                                           (c) the mean effective pressure, in kPa.
                                                                       (d) the maximum temperature in the cycle, in K.
9.1 An air-standard Otto cycle has a compression ratio of 8.5.         (e) To investigate the effects of varying compression ratio, plot
   At the beginning of compression, p1  100 kPa and T1  300 K.
   The heat addition per unit mass of air is 1400 kJ/kg. Determine         each of the quantities calculated in parts (a) through (d)
                                                                           for compression ratios ranging from 1 to 12.
   (a) the net work, in kJ per kg of air.
   (b) the thermal efficiency of the cycle.                         9.2 Solve Problem 9.1 on a cold air-standard basis with specific
                                                                       heats evaluated at 300 K.
446 Chapter 9 Gas Power Systems

9.3 At the beginning of the compression process of an air-            p
   standard Otto cycle, p1  1 bar, T1  290 K, V1  400 cm3.                       3
   The maximum temperature in the cycle is 2200 K and the com-
   pression ratio is 8. Determine                                     2                  s=c

   (a) the heat addition, in kJ.                                                    s=c
   (b) the net work, in kJ.
   (c) the thermal efficiency.                                                                           1  4
   (d) the mean effective pressure, in bar.                            Figure P9.11                                   v
   (e) Develop a full accounting of the exergy transferred to the
                                                                         particular Atkinson cycle, the compression ratio during
       air during the heat addition, in kJ.                              isentropic compression is 8.5. At the beginning of this
   (f) Devise and evaluate an exergetic efficiency for the cycle.        compression process, p1  100 kPa and T1  300 K. The con-
                                                                         stant volume heat addition per unit mass of air is 1400 kJ/kg.
   Let T0  290 K, p0  1 bar.                                             (a) Sketch the cycle on T­s coordinates. Determine (b) the net
9.4 Plot each of the quantities specified in parts (a) through (d)       work, in kJ per kg of air, (c) the thermal efficiency of the cy-
                                                                         cle, and (d) the mean effective pressure, in kPa. Compare your
   of Problem 9.3 versus the compression ratio ranging from              answers with those obtained for the Otto cycle in Problem 9.1
   2 to 12.                                                              and discuss.

9.5 Solve Problem 9.3 on a cold air-standard basis with spe-          9.12 On a cold air-standard basis, derive an expression for the
   cific heats evaluated at 300 K.                                       thermal efficiency of the Atkinson cycle (see Fig. P9.11)
                                                                         in terms of the volume ratio during the isentropic compression,
9.6 Consider the cycle in Problem 9.3 as a model of the                  the pressure ratio for the constant volume process, and the spe-
   processes in each cylinder of a spark-ignition engine. If the en-     cific heat ratio. Compare the thermal efficiencies of the cold
   gine has four cylinders and the cycle is repeated 1200 times          air-standard Atkinson and Otto cycles, each having the same
   per min in each cylinder, determine the net power output,             compression ratio and maximum temperature. Discuss.
   in kW.
                                                                      9.13 The pressure and temperature at the beginning of com-
9.7 An air-standard Otto cycle has a compression ratio of 7.5.           pression of an air-standard Diesel cycle are 95 kPa and 300 K,
   At the beginning of compression, p1  85 kPa and T1  32C.              respectively. At the end of the heat addition, the pressure is
   The mass of air is 2 g, and the maximum temperature in the            7.2 MPa and the temperature is 2150 K. Determine
   cycle is 960 K. Determine
                                                                         (a) the compression ratio.
   (a) the heat rejection, in kJ.                                        (b) the cutoff ratio.
   (b) the net work, in kJ.                                              (c) the thermal efficiency of the cycle.
   (c) the thermal efficiency.                                           (d) the mean effective pressure, in kPa.
   (d) the mean effective pressure, in kPa.
                                                                      9.14 Solve Problem 9.13 on a cold air-standard basis with spe-
9.8 Consider a modification of the air-standard Otto cycle in            cific heats evaluated at 300 K.
   which the isentropic compression and expansion processes are
   each replaced with polytropic processes having n  1.3. The         9.15 The conditions at the beginning of compression in an air-
   compression ratio is 9 for the modified cycle. At the beginning       standard Diesel cycle are fixed by p1  200 kPa, T1  380 K.
   of compression, p1  1 bar and T1  300 K. The maximum                  The compression ratio is 20 and the heat addition per unit mass
   temperature during the cycle is 2000 K. Determine                     is 900 kJ/kg. Determine

   (a) the heat transfer and work per unit mass of air, in kJ/kg,        (a) the maximum temperature, in K.
        for each process in the modified cycle.                          (b) the cutoff ratio.
                                                                         (c) the net work per unit mass of air, in kJ/kg.
   (b) the thermal efficiency.                                           (d) the thermal efficiency.
   (c) the mean effective pressure, in bar.                              (e) the mean effective pressure, in kPa.
                                                                         (f) To investigate the effects of varying compression ratio, plot
9.9 At the beginning of the compression process in an air-
   standard Otto cycle, p1  1 bar and T1  300 K. The maximum                 each of the quantities calculated in parts (a) through (e) for
   cycle temperature is 2000 K. Plot the net work per unit of mass,          compression ratios ranging from 5 to 25.
   in kJ/kg, the thermal efficiency, and the mean effective pres-
   sure, in bar, versus the compression ratio ranging from 2 to 14.

9.10 Investigate the effect of maximum cycle temperature on
   the net work per unit mass of air for air-standard Otto cycles
   with compression ratios of 5, 8, and 11. At the beginning of
   the compression process, p1  1 bar and T1  295 K. Let the
   maximum temperature in each case vary from 1000 to 2200 K.

9.11 The pressure-specific volume diagram of the air-standard
   Atkinson cycle is shown in Fig. P9.11. The cycle consists of
   isentropic compression, constant volume heat addition, isen-
   tropic expansion, and constant pressure compression. For a
                                                                            Problems: Developing Engineering Skills 447

9.16 For the Diesel cycle of Problem 9.15 with a compression             9.23 For the cycle in Problem 9.22, plot each of the quantities
   ratio of 20 and a heat addition per unit mass of 900 kJ/kg               calculated in parts (a) through (d) versus the ratio of constant-
                                                                            volume heat addition to total heat addition varying from 0 to
   (a) evaluate the exergy transfers accompanying heat and work             1. Discuss.
        for each process, in kJ/kg.
                                                                         9.24 Solve Problem 9.23 on a cold air-standard basis with spe-
   (b) devise and evaluate an exergetic efficiency for the cycle.           cific heats evaluated at 300 K.

   Let T0  300 K, p0  100 kPa.                                           9.25 The thermal efficiency, , of a cold air-standard dual cy-
                                                                            cle can be expressed as
9.17 The displacement volume of an internal combustion en-
   gine is 5.6 liters. The processes within each cylinder of the                    1    c 1rp    rpr  k    1    12 d
   engine are modeled as an air-standard Diesel cycle with a cut-                  r k1                c
   off ratio of 2.4. The state of the air at the beginning of com-            1
   pression is fixed by p1  95 kPa, T1  27C, and V1  6.0                 h                        12  krp1rc   
   liters. Determine the net work per cycle, in kJ, the power de-
   veloped by the engine, in kW, and the thermal efficiency, if the         where r is compression ratio, rc is cutoff ratio, and rp is the
   cycle is executed 1500 times per min.                                    pressure ratio for the constant volume heat addition. Derive
                                                                            this expression.
9.18 The state at the beginning of compression of an air-
   standard Diesel cycle is fixed by p1  100 kPa and T1  310 K.          9.26 An air-standard dual cycle has a compression ratio of 16
   The compression ratio is 15. For cutoff ratios ranging from              and a cutoff ratio of 1.15. At the beginning of compression,
   1.5 to 2.5, plot                                                         p1  95 kPa and T1  300 K. The pressure increases by a fac-
                                                                            tor of 2.2 during the constant volume heat addition process. If
   (a) the maximum temperature, in K.                                       the mass of air is 0.04 kg, determine
   (b) the pressure at the end of the expansion, in kPa.
   (c) the net work per unit mass of air, in kJ/kg.                         (a) the heat addition at constant volume and at constant pres-
   (d) the thermal efficiency.                                                   sure, each in kJ.

9.19 An air-standard Diesel cycle has a maximum temperature                 (b) the net work of the cycle, in kJ.
   of 1800 K. At the beginning of compression, p1  95 kPa and               (c) the heat rejection, in kJ.
   T1  300 K. The mass of air is 12 g. For compression ratios               (d) the thermal efficiency.
   ranging from 15 to 25, plot
                                                                         9.27 At the beginning of the compression process in an air-
   (a) the net work of the cycle, in kJ.                                    standard dual cycle, p1  1 bar and T1  300 K. The total heat
   (b) the thermal efficiency.                                              addition is 1000 kJ/kg. Plot the net work per unit of mass, in
   (c) the mean effective pressure, in kPa.                                 kJ/kg, the mean effective pressure, in bar, and the thermal ef-
                                                                            ficiency versus compression ratio for different fractions of con-
9.20 At the beginning of compression in an air-standard Diesel              stant volume and constant pressure heat addition. Consider
   cycle, p1  96 kPa, V1  0.016 m3, and T1  290 K. The com-                 compression ratio ranging from 10 to 20.
   pression ratio is 15 and the maximum cycle temperature is
   1290 K. Determine                                                     Brayton Cycle

   (a) the mass of air, in kg.                                           9.28 Air enters the compressor of an ideal air-standard Brayton
   (b) the heat addition and heat rejection per cycle, each in kJ.          cycle at 100 kPa, 300 K, with a volumetric flow rate of 5 m3/s.
   (c) the net work, in kJ, and the thermal efficiency.                     The compressor pressure ratio is 10. For turbine inlet temper-
                                                                            atures ranging from 1000 to 1600 K, plot
9.21 At the beginning of the compression process in an air-
   standard Diesel cycle, p1  1 bar and T1  300 K. For maximum              (a) the thermal efficiency of the cycle.
   cycle temperatures of 1200, 1500, 1800, and 2100 K, plot the             (b) the back work ratio.
   heat addition per unit of mass, in kJ/kg, the net work per unit of       (c) the net power developed, in kW.
   mass, in kJ/kg, the mean effective pressure, in bar, and the thermal
   efficiency, each versus compression ratio ranging from 5 to 20.       9.29 Air enters the compressor of an ideal air-standard Brayton
                                                                            cycle at 100 kPa, 300 K, with a volumetric flow rate of 5 m3/s.
9.22 An air-standard dual cycle has a compression ratio of 9.               The turbine inlet temperature is 1400 K. For compressor pres-
   At the beginning of compression, p1  100 kPa and T1  300                 sure ratios ranging from 2 to 20, plot
   K. The heat addition per unit mass of air is 1400 kJ/kg, with
   one half added at constant volume and one half added at con-             (a) the thermal efficiency of the cycle.
   stant pressure. Determine                                                (b) the back work ratio.
                                                                            (c) the net power developed, in kW.
   (a) the temperatures at the end of each heat addition process,
        in K.                                                            9.30 Consider an ideal air-standard Brayton cycle with mini-
                                                                            mum and maximum temperatures of 300 K and 1500 K, re-
   (b) the net work of the cycle per unit mass of air, in kJ/kg.            spectively. The pressure ratio is that which maximizes the net
   (c) the thermal efficiency.
   (d) the mean effective pressure, in kPa.
448 Chapter 9 Gas Power Systems

   work developed by the cycle per unit mass of air flow. On a            (d) the rate of exergy destruction in the regenerator, in kW,
   cold air-standard basis, calculate                                          for T0  300 K.

   (a) the compressor and turbine work per unit mass of air flow,      9.37 Reconsider Problem 9.34, but include a regenerator in the
        each in kJ/kg.                                                    cycle. For regenerator effectiveness values ranging from 0 to
                                                                          100%, plot
   (b) the thermal efficiency of the cycle.
   (c) Plot the thermal efficiency versus the maximum cycle tem-          (a) the heat addition per unit mass of air flowing, in kJ/kg.
                                                                          (b) the thermal efficiency.
       perature ranging from 1200 to 1800 K.
                                                                       9.38 On the basis of a cold air-standard analysis, show that the
9.31 On the basis of a cold air-standard analysis, show that the          thermal efficiency of an ideal regenerative gas turbine can be
   back work ratio of an ideal air-standard Brayton cycle equals          expressed as
   the ratio of absolute temperatures at the compressor inlet and
   the turbine outlet.                                                                         h  1  a T1 b 1r21k12k
                                                                                                             T3
9.32 The compressor inlet temperature for an ideal Brayton cy-
   cle is T1 and the turbine inlet temperature is T3. Using a cold        where r is the compressor pressure ratio, and T1 and T3 denote
   air-standard analysis, show that the temperature T2 at the com-        the temperatures at the compressor and turbine inlets, respectively.
   pressor exit that maximizes the net work developed per unit
   mass of air flow is T2  (T1T3)12.                                   9.39 A regenerative gas turbine power plant is shown in Fig.
                                                                          P9.39. Air enters the compressor at 1 bar, 27C with a mass flow
9.33 Reconsider Problem 9.29, but include in the analysis that            rate of 0.562 kg/s and is compressed to 4 bar. The isentropic
   the turbine and compressor each have isentropic efficiencies           efficiency of the compressor is 80%, and the regenerator effec-
   of 90, 80, and 70%. The compressor pressure ratio varies over          tiveness is 90%. All the power developed by the high-pressure
   the same range as in Problem 9.29. Plot, for each value of isen-       turbine is used to run the compressor. The low-pressure turbine
   tropic efficiency                                                      provides the net power output. Each turbine has an isentropic
                                                                          efficiency of 87% and the temperature at the inlet to the high-
   (a) the thermal efficiency.                                            pressure turbine is 1200 K. Determine
   (b) the back work ratio.
   (c) the net power developed, in kW.                                    (a) the net power output, in kW.
   (d) the rates of exergy destruction in the compressor and tur-         (b) the thermal efficiency.
                                                                          (c) the temperature of the air at states 2, 3, 5, 6, and 7, in K.
        bine, respectively, each in kW, for T0  300 K.
                                                                                                                                                      1 bar
9.34 The compressor and turbine of a simple gas turbine each
   have isentropic efficiencies of 90%. The compressor pressure                                                                        Regenerator
   ratio is 12. The minimum and maximum temperatures are                                                                                                   7
   290 K and 1400 K, respectively. On the basis of an air-standard
   analysis, compare the values of (a) the net work per unit mass                                   Q· in
   of air flowing, in kJ/kg, (b) the heat rejected per unit mass of
   air flowing, in kJ/kg, and (c) the thermal efficiency to the same                 T4 = 1200 K           3
   quantities evaluated for an ideal cycle.
                                                                               6
9.35 Air enters the compressor of a simple gas turbine at 100
   kPa, 300 K, with a volumetric flow rate of 5 m3/s. The com-                       4 Combustor           p2 = 4 bar 2
   pressor pressure ratio is 10 and its isentropic efficiency is 85%.
   At the inlet to the turbine, the pressure is 950 kPa, and the tem-                                      Compressor
   perature is 1400 K. The turbine has an isentropic efficiency of
   88% and the exit pressure is 100 kPa. On the basis of an air-                     High-pressure
   standard analysis,
                                                                                     turbine
   (a) develop a full accounting of the net exergy increase of the
        air passing through the gas turbine combustor, in kW.                     5                           1

   (b) devise and evaluate an exergetic efficiency for the gas tur-    W· net                              1 bar, 27°C
        bine cycle.
                                                                                     Low-pressure turbine
   Let T0  300 K, p0  100 kPa.
                                                                          Figure P9.39
Regeneration, Reheat, and Compression
with Intercooling                                                      9.40 Air enters the turbine of a gas turbine at 1200 kPa, 1200 K,
                                                                          and expands to 100 kPa in two stages. Between the stages, the
9.36 Reconsider Problem 9.33, but incorporate a regenerator
   with an effectiveness of 80% into the cycle. Plot

   (a) the thermal efficiency.
   (b) the back work ratio.
   (c) the net power developed, in kW.
                                                                         Problems: Developing Engineering Skills 449

   air is reheated at a constant pressure of 350 kPa to 1200 K.             between the stages. The regenerator effectiveness is 80%, and
   The expansion through each turbine stage is isentropic. De-              the pressure ratios are the same across each compressor stage.
   termine, in kJ per kg of air flowing                                     The stages have equal isentropic efficiencies. Construct the
                                                                            same plots as requested in parts (a) through (c) of Problem 9.36
   (a) the work developed by each stage.                                    for compressor stage isentropic efficiencies of 100%, 90%,
   (b) the heat transfer for the reheat process.                            80%, and 70%.
   (c) the increase in net work as compared to a single stage of
   expansion with no reheat.                                             9.48 Referring to Example 9.10, show that if Td  T1 the pres-
                                                                            sure ratios across the two compressor stages are related by
9.41 Reconsider Problem 9.40 and include in the analysis that
   each turbine stage might have an isentropic efficiency less than      pi       p2        Td   k  1k    12
   100%. Plot each of the quantities calculated in parts (a) through
   (c) of Problem 9.40 for values of the interstage pressure rang-       p1    a      b  a      b
   ing from 100 to 1200 kPa and for isentropic efficiencies of                    pi T1
   100%, 80%, and 60%.
                                                                         9.49 Rework Example 9.10 for the case of a three-stage com-
9.42 Consider a two-stage turbine operating at steady state with            pressor with intercooling between stages.
   reheat at constant pressure between the stages. Show that the
   maximum work is developed when the pressure ratio is the              9.50 Modify the cycle of Problem 9.36 to include two-stage
   same across each stage. Use a cold air-standard analysis, as-            compression and expansion, with intercooling to 300 K and
   suming the inlet state and the exit pressure are specified, each         reheat to 1400 K, respectively, between the stages. The
   expansion process is isentropic, and the temperature at the inlet        regenerator effectiveness is 80%, and the pressure ratios are
   to each turbine stage is the same. Kinetic and potential energy          the same across each compressor stage. The intercooler and
   effects can be ignored.                                                  reheater both operate at the same pressure. The compressor
                                                                            and turbine stages all have equal isentropic efficiencies. Con-
9.43 Modify the cycle of Problem 9.36 to include a two-stage                struct the same plots as requested in parts (a) through (c) of
   turbine expansion with reheat to 1400 K at constant pressure be-         Problem 9.36 for stage isentropic efficiencies of 100%, 90%,
   tween the stages. The regenerator effectiveness is 80%, and the          80%, and 70%.
   pressure ratio is the same across each turbine stage. The stages
   have equal isentropic efficiencies. Construct the same plots as       9.51 Air enters the compressor of a gas turbine at 100 kPa,
   requested in parts (a) through (c) of Problem 9.36 for turbine           300 K. The air is compressed in two stages to 900 kPa, with
   stage isentropic efficiencies of 100%, 90%, 80%, and 70%.                intercooling to 300 K between the stages at a pressure of
                                                                            300 kPa. The turbine inlet temperature is 1480 K and the ex-
9.44 If the inlet state and the exit pressure are specified for a two-      pansion occurs in two stages, with reheat to 1420 K between
   stage turbine with reheat between the stages and operating at            the stages at a pressure of 300 kPa. The compressor and tur-
   steady state, show that the maximum total work output is ob-             bine stage efficiencies are 84 and 82%, respectively. The net
   tained when the pressure ratio is the same across each stage. Use        power developed is 1.8 MW. Determine
   a cold air-standard analysis assuming that each compression
   process is isentropic, there is no pressure drop through the re-         (a) the volumetric flow rate, in m3/s, at the inlet of each com-
   heater, and the temperature at the inlet to each turbine stage is             pressor stage.
   the same. Kinetic and potential energy effects can be ignored.
                                                                            (b) the thermal efficiency of the cycle.
9.45 A two-stage air compressor operates at steady state, com-              (c) the back work ratio.
   pressing 10 m3/min of air from 100 kPa, 300 K, to 1200 kPa.
   An intercooler between the two stages cools the air to 300 K          9.52 Reconsider Problem 9.51 but include a regenerator with
   at a constant pressure of 350 kPa. The compression processes             an effectiveness of 75%.
   are isentropic. Calculate the power required to run the com-
   pressor, in kW, and compare the result to the power required          Other Gas Power System Applications
   for isentropic compression from the same inlet state to the same      9.53 Air at 22 kPa, 220 K, and 250 m/s enters a turbojet en-
   final pressure.
                                                                            gine in flight at an altitude of 10,000 m. The pressure ratio
9.46 Reconsider Problem 9.45 and include in the analysis that               across the compressor is 12. The turbine inlet temperature
   each compressor stage might have an isentropic efficiency less           is 1400 K, and the pressure at the nozzle exit is 22 kPa. The
   than 100%. Plot, in kW, (a) the power input to each stage,               diffuser and nozzle processes are isentropic, the compressor
   (b) the heat transfer rate for the intercooler, and (c) the decrease     and turbine have isentropic efficiencies of 85 and 88%,
   in power input as compared to a single stage of compression              respectively, and there is no pressure drop for flow through
   with no intercooling, for values of interstage pressure ranging          the combustor. On the basis of an air-standard analysis,
   from 100 to 1200 kPa and for isentropic efficiencies of 100%,            determine
   80%, and 60%.
                                                                            (a) the pressures and temperatures at each principal state, in
9.47 Modify the cycle of Problem 9.36 to include a two-stage                     kPa and K, respectively.
   compressor with intercooling to 300 K at constant pressure
                                                                            (b) the velocity at the nozzle exit, in m/s.

                                                                            Neglect kinetic energy except at the diffuser inlet and the
                                                                            nozzle exit.
450 Chapter 9 Gas Power Systems

9.54 For the turbojet in Problem 9.54, plot the velocity at the         (e) the net rate at which exergy is carried out with the cool-
   nozzle exit, in m/s, the pressure at the turbine exit, in kPa, and       ing water, in MW.
   the rate of heat input to the combustor, in kW, each as a func-
   tion of compressor pressure ratio in the range of 6 to 14. Re-       Let T0  20C, p0  1 bar.
   peat for turbine inlet temperatures of 1200 K and 1000 K.
                                                                        9.59 A combined gas turbine­vapor power plant (Fig. 9.23) has
9.55 Consider the addition of an afterburner to the turbojet in            a net power output of 100 MW. Air enters the compressor of
   Problem 9.54 that raises the temperature at the inlet of the nozzle     the gas turbine at 100 kPa, 300 K, and is compressed to
   to 1300 K. Determine the velocity at the nozzle exit, in m/s.           1200 kPa. The isentropic efficiency of the compressor is 84%.
                                                                           The conditions at the inlet to the turbine are 1200 kPa and
9.56 Air enters the diffuser of a ramjet engine at 40 kPa, 240 K,          1400 K. Air expands through the turbine, which has an
   with a velocity of 2500 km/h and decelerates to negligible ve-          isentropic efficiency of 88%, to a pressure of 100 kPa. The air
   locity. On the basis of an air-standard analysis, the heat addition     then passes through the interconnecting heat exchanger, and is
   is 1080 kJ per kg of air passing through the engine. Air exits          finally discharged at 480 K. Steam enters the turbine of the
   the nozzle at 40 kPa. Determine                                         vapor power cycle at 8 MPa, 400C, and expands to the con-
                                                                           denser pressure of 8 kPa. Water enters the pump as saturated
   (a) the pressure at the diffuser exit, in kPa.                          liquid at 8 kPa. The turbine and pump have isentropic effi-
   (b) the velocity at the nozzle exit, in m/s.                            ciencies of 90 and 80%, respectively. Determine

   Neglect kinetic energy except at the diffuser inlet and the noz-     (a) the mass flow rates of air and steam, each in kg/s.
   zle exit.
                                                                        (b) the thermal efficiency of the combined cycle.

9.57 A turboprop engine consists of a diffuser, compressor,             (c) a full accounting of the net exergy increase of the air pass-
   combustor, turbine, and nozzle. The turbine drives a propeller                                                              #
   as well as the compressor. Air enters the diffuser with a volu-      ing  through  the  combustor  of  the  gas  turbine,  mair  ef3    ef2,
   metric flow rate of 83.7 m3/s at 40 kPa, 240 K, and a velocity
   of 180 m/s, and decelerates essentially to zero velocity. The        in MW. Discuss.
   compressor pressure ratio is 10 and the compressor has an
   isentropic efficiency of 85%. The turbine inlet temperature is       Let T0  300 K, p0  100 kPa.
   1140 K, and its isentropic efficiency is 85%. The turbine exit
   pressure is 50 kPa. Flow through the diffuser and nozzle is          9.60 Air enters the compressor of an Ericsson cycle at 300 K,
   isentropic. Using an air-standard analysis, determine                   1 bar, with a mass flow rate of 5 kg/s. The pressure and tem-
                                                                           perature at the inlet to the turbine are 10 bar and 1400 K, re-
   (a) the power delivered to the propeller, in MW.                        spectively. Determine
   (b) the velocity at the nozzle exit, in m/s.
                                                                        (a) the net power developed, in kW.
   Neglect kinetic energy except at the diffuser inlet and the noz-     (b) the thermal efficiency.
   zle exit.                                                            (c) the back work ratio.

9.58 Air enters the compressor of a combined gas turbine­vapor          9.61 For the cycle in Problem 9.60, plot the net power devel-
   power plant (Fig. 9.23) at 1 bar, 25C. The isentropic com-              oped, in kW, for compressor pressure ratios ranging from 2
   pressor efficiency is 85% and the compressor pressure ratio is          to 15. Repeat for turbine inlet temperatures of 1200 K and
   14. The air passing through the combustor receives energy by            1000 K.
   heat transfer at a rate of 50 MW with no significant decrease
   in pressure. At the inlet to the turbine the air is at 1250C. The    9.62 Nitrogen (N2) is the working fluid of a Stirling cycle with
   air expands through the turbine, which has an isentropic effi-          a compression ratio of nine. At the beginning of the isother-
   ciency of 87%, to a pressure of 1 bar. Then, the air passes             mal compression, the temperature, pressure, and volume are
   through the interconnecting heat exchanger and is finally dis-          310 K, 1 bar, and 0.008 m3, respectively. The temperature dur-
   charged at 200C, 1 bar. Steam enters the turbine of the vapor           ing the isothermal expansion is 1000 K. Determine
   cycle at 12.5 MPa, 500C, and expands to a condenser pres-
   sure of 0.1 bar. Water enters the pump as a saturated liquid at         (a) the net work, in kJ.
   0.1 bar. The turbine and pump have isentropic efficiencies of           (b) the thermal efficiency.
   90 and 100%, respectively. Cooling water enters the condenser           (c) the mean effective pressure, in bar.
   at 20C and exits at 35C. Determine
                                                                        Compressible Flow
(a) the mass flow rates of the air, steam, and cooling water,
                                                                        9.63 If the mass flow rate of air for the cycle in Problem 9.54
each in kg/s.                                                              is 50 kg/s, calculate the thrust developed by the engine, in kN.

(b) the net power developed by the gas turbine cycle and the            9.64 Referring to the turbojet in Problem 9.54 and the modi-
                                                                           fied turbojet in Problem 9.56, calculate the thrust developed
vapor cycle, respectively, each in MW.                                     by each engine, in kN, if the mass flow rate of air is 50 kg/s.
                                                                           Discuss.
(c) the thermal efficiency of the combined cycle.
                                                                        9.65 Air enters the diffuser of a turbojet engine at 18 kPa,
(d) the net rate at which exergy is carried out with the exhaust           216 K, with a volumetric flow rate of 230 m3/s and a veloc-
       #                                                                   ity of 265 m/s. The compressor pressure ratio is 15, and its
air,  mair  ef5    ef1,  in  MW.
                                                                       Problems: Developing Engineering Skills 451

   isentropic efficiency is 87%. Air enters the turbine at 1360 K         280C. The mass flow rate is 2 kg/s, the flow is choked, and
   and the same pressure as at the exit of the compressor. The            the exit plane pressure is 1 bar. Determine the diameter of the
   turbine isentropic efficiency is 89%, and the nozzle isentropic        nozzle, in cm, at locations where the pressure is 1.5 bar, and
   efficiency is 97%. The pressure at the nozzle exit is 18 kPa.          1 bar, respectively.
   On the basis of an air-standard analysis, calculate the thrust,
   in kN.                                                              9.78 An ideal gas mixture with k  1.31 and a molecular weight
                                                                          of 23 is supplied to a converging nozzle at po  5 bar, To 
9.67 Calculate the ratio of the thrust developed to the mass flow         700 K, which discharges into a region where the pressure is 1
   rate of air, in N per kg/s, for the ramjet engine in Problem 9.57.     bar. The exit area is 30 cm2. For steady isentropic flow through
                                                                          the nozzle, determine
9.68 Air flows at steady state through a horizontal, well-insulated,
   constant-area duct of diameter 0.25 m. At the inlet,                   (a) the exit temperature of the gas, in K.
   p1  2.4 bar, T1  430 K. The temperature of the air leaving             (b) the exit velocity of the gas, in m/s.
   the duct is 370 K. The mass flow rate is 600 kg/min. Determine         (c) the mass flow rate, in kg/s.
   the magnitude, in N, of the net horizontal force exerted by the
   duct wall on the air. In which direction does the force act?        9.79 Air at po  1.4 bar, To  280 K expands isentropically
                                                                          through a converging nozzle and discharges to the atmosphere
9.69 Air flows at steady state through a horizontal, well-                at 1 bar. The exit plane area is 0.0013 m2.
   insulated duct of varying cross-sectional area, entering at
   15 bar, 340 K, with a velocity of 20 m/s. At the exit, the pres-       (a) Determine the mass flow rate, in kg/s.
   sure is 9 bar and the temperature is 300 K. The diameter of            (b) If the supply region pressure, po, were increased to 2 bar,
   the exit is 1 cm. Determine
                                                                               what would be the mass flow rate, in kg/s.?
   (a) the net force, in N, exerted by the air on the duct in the
        direction of flow.                                             9.80 Air as an ideal gas with k  1.4 enters a diffuser operat-
                                                                          ing at steady state at 4 bar, 290 K, with a velocity of 512 m/s.
   (b) the rate of exergy destruction, in kW. Let T0  300 K and           Assuming isentropic flow, plot the velocity, in m/s, the Mach
        p0  1 bar.                                                        number, and the area ratio AA* for locations in the flow cor-
                                                                          responding to pressures ranging from 4 to 14 bar.
9.70 A flash of lightning is sighted and 3 seconds later thun-
   der is heard. Approximately how far away was the lightning          9.81 A converging­diverging nozzle operating at steady state has
   strike?                                                                a throat area of 3 cm2 and an exit area of 6 cm2. Air as an ideal
                                                                          gas with k  1.4 enters the nozzle at 8 bar, 400 K, and a Mach
9.71 Using data from Table A-4, estimate the sonic velocity, in           number of 0.2, and flows isentropically throughout. If the noz-
   m/s, of steam of 60 bar, 360C. Compare the result with the             zle is choked, and the diverging portion acts as a supersonic
   value predicted by the ideal gas model.                                nozzle, determine the mass flow rate, in kg/s, and the Mach
                                                                          number, pressure, in bar, and temperature, in K, at the exit. Re-
9.72 Plot the Mach number of carbon dioxide at 1 bar, 460 m/s,            peat if the diverging portion acts as a supersonic diffuser.
   as a function of temperature in the range 250 to 1000 K.
                                                                       9.82 For the nozzle in Problem 9.81, determine the back pres-
9.73 For Problem 9.70, determine the values of the Mach num-              sure, in bar, for which a normal shock would stand at the exit
   ber, the stagnation temperature, in K, and the stagnation pres-        plane.
   sure, in bar, at the inlet and exit of the duct, respectively.
                                                                       9.83 For the nozzle in Problem 9.81, a normal shock stands in
9.74 Steam flows through a passageway, and at a particular lo-            the diverging section at a location where the pressure is 2 bar.
   cation the pressure is 3 bar. The corresponding stagnation state       The flow is isentropic, except where the shock stands. Deter-
   is fixed by a stagnation pressure of 7 bar and a stagnation tem-       mine the back pressure, in bar.
   perature of 400C. Determine the specific enthalpy, in kJ/kg,
   and the velocity, in m/s.                                           9.84 Air as an ideal gas with k  1.4 undergoes a normal shock.
                                                                          The upstream conditions are px  0.5 bar, Tx  280 K, and
9.75 For the isentropic flow of an ideal gas with constant spe-           Mx  1.8. Determine
   cific heat ratio k, the ratio of the temperature T* to the stag-
   nation temperature To is T*To  2(k  1). Develop this                   (a) the pressure py, in bar.
   relationship.                                                          (b) the stagnation pressure pox, in bar.
                                                                          (c) the stagnation temperature Tox, in K.
9.76 A gas expands isentropically through a converging nozzle             (d) the change in specific entropy across the shock, in kJ/kg # K.
   from a large tank at 8 bar, 500 K. Assuming ideal gas behavior,        (e) Plot the quantities of parts (a)­(d) versus Mx ranging from
   determine the critical pressure p*, in bar, and the corresponding
   temperature, in K, if the gas is                                           1.0 to 2.0. All other upstream conditions remain the same.

   (a) air.                                                            9.85 Air at 3.4 bar, 530 K, and a Mach number of 0.4 enters a
   (b) carbon dioxide (CO2).                                              converging­diverging nozzle operating at steady state. A nor-
   (c) water vapor.                                                       mal shock stands in the diverging section at a location where
                                                                          the Mach number is Mx  1.8. The flow is isentropic, except
9.77 Steam expands isentropically through a converging noz-               where the shock stands. If the air behaves as an ideal gas with
   zle operating at steady state from a large tank at 1.83 bar,           k  1.4, determine
452 Chapter 9 Gas Power Systems

(a) the stagnation temperature Tox, in K.                             9.86 Derive the following expressions: (a) Eq. 9.55, (b) Eq.
(b) the stagnation pressure pox, in bar.                                 9.56, (c) Eq. 9.57.
(c) the pressure px, in bar.
(d) the pressure py, in bar.                                          9.87 Using Interactive Thermodynamics: IT, generate tables of
(e) the stagnation pressure poy, in bar.                                 the same isentropic flow functions as in Table 9.1 for specific
(f ) the stagnation temperature Toy, in K.                               heat ratios of 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, and 1.67 and Mach numbers
                                                                         ranging from 0 to 5.
If the throat area is 7.6  104 m2, and the exit plane pressure
                                                                      9.88 Using Interactive Thermodynamics: IT, generate tables of
is 2.4 bar, determine the mass flow rate, in kg/s, and the exit          the same normal shock functions as in Table 9.2 for specific
area, in m2.                                                             heat ratios of 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, and 1.67 and Mach numbers ranging
                                                                         from 1 to 5.

Design & Open Ended Problems: Exploring Engineering Practice

9.1D With the development of high-strength metal­ceramic              High-pressure            Low-
   materials, internal combustion engines can now be built with            steam              pressure
   no cylinder wall cooling. These adiabatic engines operate with                              steam
   cylinder wall temperatures as high as 930C. What are the im-                    Combustor
   portant considerations for adiabatic engine design? Are adia-
   batic engines likely to find widespread application? Discuss.      Air in

9.2D An important factor leading to the increase in perform-                                    Heat
   ance of gas turbines over the years has been the use of turbine                            recovery
   blade cooling to allow higher turbine inlet temperatures. With
   the aid of diagrams, explain the various methods of turbine                                 boiler
   blade cooling that are commonly used. What are some of the
   most important research issues in gas turbine blade technol-                               Turbine   Water
   ogy today? Discuss.                                                                        exhaust   supply

9.3D Steam-injected gas turbines use hot turbine exhaust gases         Figure P9.3D
   to produce steam that is injected directly into the gas turbine
   system. Figure P9.3D illustrates two possible approaches to        9.6D Inlet air temperature and pressure can have significant im-
   steam injection. In one approach, steam is injected directly into     pact on gas turbine performance. Investigate the effect on the
   the combustor. In the other approach, steam is injected into the      power developed by a General Electric LM 6000 gas turbine
   low-pressure turbine stages.                                          when the inlet air temperature and pressure vary about base-
                                                                         line values of 10C and 1 bar, respectively. What are some ways
   (a) What are the relative advantages and disadvantages of             that could be used to alter the inlet air temperature and pres-
        these steam injection approaches? How does steam injec-          sure, and what are the economic implications? Prepare a mem-
        tion lead to better power cycle performance?                     orandum summarizing your findings.

   (b) Each of the steam injection approaches is inherently simpler   9.7D A manufacturing company currently purchases 2.4 
        than combined cycles like the one illustrated in Fig. 9.23.      105 MW # h of electricity annually from the local utility com-
        What are the other advantages and disadvantages of direct        pany. An aging boiler on the premises annually provides 4 
        steam injection compared to combined cycles?                     108 kg of process steam at 20 bar. Consider the feasibility of
                                                                         acquiring a cogeneration system to meet these needs. The sys-
9.4D Closed Brayton power systems, receiving their energy in-            tem would employ a natural gas­fueled gas turbine to produce
   put from radioisotopes, nuclear reactors, or solar collectors,
   have been suggested for meeting space vehicle power require-
   ments. What are the advantages and disadvantages of closed
   Brayton cycles for spaceflight applications? What mission-
   specific design criteria might determine the selection of the
   system and the energy source?

9.5D Factories requiring compressed air and process heat com-
   monly run electrically-driven air compressors and natural gas-
   fired boilers to meet these respective needs. As an alternative,
   commercially available natural gas-fueled engine-driven com-
   pressor systems can simultaneously provide for both needs.
   Determine if utility rates in your locale are favorable for the
   adoption of such systems. Prepare a memorandum explaining
   your conclusions.
Design & Open Ended Problems: Exploring Engineering Practice 453

   the electricity and a heat-recovery steam generator to produce       subsonic and supersonic applications. Include a discussion of
   the steam. Using thermoeconomic principles, investigate the          how engine placement affects diffuser performance.
   economic issues that should be considered in making a rec-
   ommendation about the proposed cogeneration system. Write         9.10D In what ways must the compressible flow analysis pre-
   a report of your findings.                                           sented in this chapter be modified to model the flow through
                                                                        steam turbines? What special design considerations arise be-
9.8D The Stirling engine was first patented in 1816 but has not         cause of the possibility of condensation occurring within the
   been widely commercialized. Still, efforts continue to develop       blade rows and nozzles of steam turbines?
   Stirling engine technology for practical uses such as vehicle
   propulsion. Prepare a memorandum summarizing the status of        9.11D End of Cheap Oil in View, Experts Say (see box
   Stirling engine technology. Discuss the advantages and disad-        Sec. 9.2). Considering the likelihood of oil scarcity in years
   vantages of Stirling engines and assess the likelihood that they     ahead, investigate alternatives to conventional oil for meet-
   will be more widely used in the future.                              ing our transportation needs without excessive costs or en-
                                                                        vironmental impacts. Write a report including at least three
9.9D The inlet to a gas turbine aircraft engine must provide air        references.
   to the compressor with as little a drop in stagnation pressure
   and with as small a drag force on the aircraft as possible. The   9.12D New Power Plant Breaks Imagined Barrier (see box
   inlet also serves as a diffuser to raise the pressure of the air     Sec. 9.10). Investigate technical innovations that might allow
   entering the compressor while reducing the air velocity. Write       the thermal efficiency of future combined-cycle power plants
   a paper discussing the most common types of inlet designs for        to exceed the 60% value of the H SystemTM. Write a report
                                                                        including at least three references.
                         C  Refrigeration and
                         H            Heat Pump
                         A                Systems
                         P
                         T

10 E
                         R

chapter objective   E N G I N E E R I N G C O N T E X T Refrigeration systems for food preser-
                    vation and air conditioning play prominent roles in our everyday lives. Heat pumps also
                    are used for heating buildings and for producing industrial process heat. There are
                    many other examples of commercial and industrial uses of refrigeration, including air
                    separation to obtain liquid oxygen and liquid nitrogen, liquefaction of natural gas, and
                    production of ice.

                       The objective of this chapter is to describe some of the common types of refrigeration
                    and heat pump systems presently in use and to illustrate how such systems can be mod-
                    eled thermodynamically. The three principal types described are the vapor-compression,
                    absorption, and reversed Brayton cycles. As for the power systems studied in Chaps. 8
                    and 9, both vapor and gas systems are considered. In vapor systems, the refrigerant is
                    alternately vaporized and condensed. In gas refrigeration systems, the refrigerant remains
                    a gas.

       10.1 Vapor Refrigeration Systems

                                The purpose of a refrigeration system is to maintain a cold region at a temperature below
                                the temperature of its surroundings. This is commonly achieved using the vapor refrigera-
                                tion systems that are the subject of the present section.

                                      CARNOT REFRIGERATION CYCLE

                                To introduce some important aspects of vapor refrigeration, let us begin by considering a
                                Carnot vapor refrigeration cycle. This cycle is obtained by reversing the Carnot vapor power
                                cycle introduced in Sec. 5.6. Figure 10.1 shows the schematic and accompanying T­s dia-
                                gram of a Carnot refrigeration cycle operating between a region at temperature TC and an-
                                other region at a higher temperature TH. The cycle is executed by a refrigerant circulating
                                steadily through a series of components. All processes are internally reversible. Also, since
                                heat transfers between the refrigerant and each region occur with no temperature differences,
                                there are no external irreversibilities. The energy transfers shown on the diagram are positive
                                in the directions indicated by the arrows.

454
                                                                                    10.1 Vapor Refrigeration Systems 455

                             ·
    Warm region at TH Qout

                                                    T

                                2                           3  2

    3 Condenser                                     TH

 ·     Turbine                               ·
Wt                                          Wc

        Compressor                                  TC
       Evaporator
                                                            4  1

    4                              1                        b  a               s

                           ·
    Cold region at TC Qin

 Figure 10.1 Carnot vapor refrigeration cycle.

   Let us follow the refrigerant as it passes steadily through each of the components in
the cycle, beginning at the inlet to the evaporator. The refrigerant enters the evaporator
as a two-phase liquid­vapor mixture at state 4. In the evaporator some of the refrigerant
changes phase from liquid to vapor as a result of heat transfer from the region at tem-
perature TC to the refrigerant. The temperature and pressure of the refrigerant remain
constant during the process from state 4 to state 1. The refrigerant is then compressed
adiabatically from state 1, where it is a two-phase liquid­vapor mixture, to state 2, where
it is a saturated vapor. During this process, the temperature of the refrigerant increases
from TC to TH, and the pressure also increases. The refrigerant passes from the compres-
sor into the condenser, where it changes phase from saturated vapor to saturated liquid
as a result of heat transfer to the region at temperature TH. The temperature and pressure
remain constant in the process from state 2 to state 3. The refrigerant returns to the state
at the inlet of the evaporator by expanding adiabatically through a turbine. In this process,
from state 3 to state 4, the temperature decreases from TH to TC, and there is a decrease
in pressure.

   Since the Carnot vapor refrigeration cycle is made up of internally reversible processes,
areas on the T­s diagram can be interpreted as heat transfers. Applying Eq. 6.51, area
1­a­b­4­1 is the heat added to the refrigerant from the cold region per unit mass of refrig-
erant flowing. Area 2­a­b­3­2 is the heat rejected from the refrigerant to the warm region
per unit mass of refrigerant flowing. The enclosed area 1­2­3­4­1 is the net heat transfer
from the refrigerant. The net heat transfer from the refrigerant equals the net work done on
the refrigerant. The net work is the difference between the compressor work input and the
turbine work output.

   The coefficient of performance  of any refrigeration cycle is the ratio of the refrigera-
tion effect to the net work input required to achieve that effect. For the Carnot vapor refrig-
eration cycle shown in Fig. 10.1, the coefficient of performance is

                                         #    Q# inm#
                                bmax    Wc           #
                                            m#      Wt  m#

                                        area  1­a­b­4­1            TC1sa  sb2  sb2
                                        area  1­2­3­4­1        1TH  TC2 1sa 

                                        TH  TC  TC                                  (10.1)
                                            

This equation, which corresponds to Eq. 5.9, represents the maximum theoretical coefficient
of performance of any refrigeration cycle operating between regions at TC and TH.
456 Chapter 10 Refrigeration and Heat Pump Systems

DEPARTURES FROM THE CARNOT CYCLE

Actual vapor refrigeration systems depart significantly from the Carnot cycle considered
above and have coefficients of performance lower than would be calculated from Eq. 10.1.
Three ways actual systems depart from the Carnot cycle are considered next.

 One of the most significant departures is related to the heat transfers between the refrig-
   erant and the two regions. In actual systems, these heat transfers are not accomplished
   reversibly as presumed above. In particular, to achieve a rate of heat transfer sufficient
   to maintain the temperature of the cold region at TC with a practical-sized evaporator
   requires the temperature of the refrigerant in the evaporator, TC, to be several degrees
   below TC. This is illustrated by the placement of the temperature TC on the T­s diagram
   of Fig. 10.2. Similarly, to obtain a sufficient heat transfer rate from the refrigerant to the
   warm region requires that the refrigerant temperature in the condenser, TH, be several
   degrees above TH. This is illustrated by the placement of the temperature TH on the T­s
   diagram of Fig. 10.2.
      Maintaining the refrigerant temperatures in the heat exchangers at TC and TH rather
   than at TC and TH, respectively, has the effect of reducing the coefficient of perform-
   ance. This can be seen by expressing the coefficient of performance of the refrigeration
   cycle designated by 1­2­3­4­1 on Fig. 10.2 as

                   bż                                  area 1ż­a­b­4ż­1           T Cż    (10.2)
                                                      area 1ż­2ż­3ż­4ż­1ż      THż  T Cż

    Comparing the areas underlying the expressions for max and  given above, we
    conclude that the value of  is less than max. This conclusion about the effect of
    refrigerant temperature on the coefficient of performance also applies to other refrigera-

    tion cycles considered in the chapter.

 Even when the temperature differences between the refrigerant and warm and cold re-
   gions are taken into consideration, there are other features that make the vapor refrigera-
   tion cycle of Fig. 10.2 impractical as a prototype. Referring again to the figure, note
   that the compression process from state 1 to state 2 occurs with the refrigerant as a
   two-phase liquid­vapor mixture. This is commonly referred to as wet compression. Wet
   compression is normally avoided because the presence of liquid droplets in the flowing
   liquid­vapor mixture can damage the compressor. In actual systems, the compressor
   handles vapor only. This is known as dry compression.

 Another feature that makes the cycle of Fig. 10.2 impractical is the expansion
   process from the saturated liquid state 3 to the low-quality, two-phase liquid­vapor
   mixture state 4. This expansion produces a relatively small amount of work com-
   pared to the work input in the compression process. The work output achieved by
   an actual turbine would be smaller yet because turbines operating under these

 T                 Condenser
             3
                2  temperature, TH
TH

                   Temperature of warm
                   region, TH

TC  4           1                                   Temperature of cold
                                                    region, TC
    b           a                                                             Figure 10.2 Comparison of the
                                                            Evaporator       condenser and evaporator temperatures
                                                            temperature, TC  with those of the warm and cold regions.

                                                           s
                                                             10.2 Analyzing Vapor-Compression Refrigeration Systems 457

                 Q· out

   3                         2

                 Condenser

      Expansion  Compressor                   W·c
      valve

                 Evaporator

4                               1

                                Saturated or

                                superheated vapor

                 Q· in                                  Figure 10.3 Components of a vapor-
                                                       compression refrigeration system.

      conditions typically have low efficiencies. Accordingly, the work output of the tur-
      bine is normally sacrificed by substituting a simple throttling valve for the expansion
      turbine, with consequent savings in initial and maintenance costs. The components of
      the resulting cycle are illustrated in Fig. 10.3, where dry compression is presumed.
      This cycle, known as the vapor-compression refrigeration cycle, is the subject of the
      section to follow.

10.2 Analyzing Vapor-Compression
           Refrigeration Systems

Vapor-compression refrigeration systems are the most common refrigeration systems in use vapor-compression
today. The object of this section is to introduce some important features of systems of this refrigeration
type and to illustrate how they are modeled thermodynamically.

 10.2.1 Evaluating Principal Work and Heat Transfers

Let us consider the steady-state operation of the vapor-compression system illustrated in
Fig. 10.3. Shown on the figure are the principal work and heat transfers, which are positive
in the directions of the arrows. Kinetic and potential energy changes are neglected in the
following analyses of the components. We begin with the evaporator, where the desired
refrigeration effect is achieved.

 As the refrigerant passes through the evaporator, heat transfer from the refrigerated

      space results in the vaporization of the refrigerant. For a control volume enclosing the

      refrigerant side of the evaporator, the mass and energy rate balances reduce to give the

      rate of heat transfer per unit mass of refrigerant flowing as

                                   #

                                   Qin             h1    h4                                 (10.3)
                                    #
                                   m
458 Chapter 10 Refrigeration and Heat Pump Systems

                               #                                                                           #

                        where m is the mass flow rate of the refrigerant. The heat transfer rate Qin is referred to

refrigeration capacity  as the refrigeration capacity. In the SI unit system, the capacity is normally expressed
ton of refrigeration
                        in kW. Another commonly used unit for the refrigeration capacity is the ton of refriger-

                        ation, which is equal to 211 kJ/min.

                         The refrigerant leaving the evaporator is compressed to a relatively high pressure and

                        temperature by the compressor. Assuming no heat transfer to or from the compressor,

                        the mass and energy rate balances for a control volume enclosing the compressor

                        give

                                                                      #

                                                                   Wc         h2     h1                              (10.4)
                                                                    #
                                                                   m

                        where   #  m#  is  the  rate  of  power  input   per  unit  mass  of  refrigerant  flowing.
                               Wc

                         Next, the refrigerant passes through the condenser, where the refrigerant condenses and

                        there is heat transfer from the refrigerant to the cooler surroundings. For a control vol-

                        ume enclosing the refrigerant side of the condenser, the rate of heat transfer from the

                        refrigerant per unit mass of refrigerant flowing is

                                                                   #

                                                                 Qout          h2    h3                              (10.5)
                                                                   #
                                                                  m

                         Finally, the refrigerant at state 3 enters the expansion valve and expands to the
                           evaporator pressure. This process is usually modeled as a throttling process for
                           which

                                                                         h4  h3                                      (10.6)

                        The refrigerant pressure decreases in the irreversible adiabatic expansion, and there is an
                        accompanying increase in specific entropy. The refrigerant exits the valve at state 4 as a
                        two-phase liquid­vapor mixture.

                        In the vapor-compression system, the net power input is equal to the compressor power,

                        since the expansion valve involves no power input or output. Using the quantities and ex-

                        pressions introduced above, the coefficient of performance of the vapor-compression refrig-

                        eration system of Fig. 10.3 is

                                                                       #   m#       h1    h4                         (10.7)
                                                                      Qin           h2    h1
                                                          b            #
                                                                      Wc   m#

                           Provided states 1 through 4 are fixed, Eqs. 10.3 through 10.7 can be used to evaluate the
                        principal work and heat transfers and the coefficient of performance of the vapor-
                        compression system shown in Fig. 10.3. Since these equations have been developed by
                        reducing mass and energy rate balances, they apply equally for actual performance when
                        irreversibilities are present in the evaporator, compressor, and condenser and for idealized
                        performance in the absence of such effects. Although irreversibilities in the evaporator,
                        compressor, and condenser can have a pronounced effect on overall performance, it is in-
                        structive to consider an idealized cycle in which they are assumed absent. Such a cycle
                        establishes an upper limit on the performance of the vapor-compression refrigeration cycle.
                        It is considered next.

                         10.2.2 Performance of Vapor-Compression Systems

                        IDEAL CYCLE. If irreversibilities within the evaporator and condenser are ignored, there are
                        no frictional pressure drops, and the refrigerant flows at constant pressure through the two
                                                 10.2 Analyzing Vapor-Compression Refrigeration Systems 459

T
                                             2s

                3

                         1
4

                                    Figure 10.4 T­s diagram of an ideal vapor-
                              s compression cycle.

heat exchangers. If compression occurs without irreversibilities, and stray heat transfer to the
surroundings is also ignored, the compression process is isentropic. With these considera-
tions, the vapor-compression refrigeration cycle labeled 1­2s­3­4­1 on the T­s diagram of
Fig. 10.4 results. The cycle consists of the following series of processes:

Process 1­2s: Isentropic compression of the refrigerant from state 1 to the condenser pres-
      sure at state 2s.

Process 2s­3: Heat transfer from the refrigerant as it flows at constant pressure through the
      condenser. The refrigerant exits as a liquid at state 3.

Process 3­4: Throttling process from state 3 to a two-phase liquid­vapor mixture at 4.

Process 4­1: Heat transfer to the refrigerant as it flows at constant pressure through the
      evaporator to complete the cycle.

All of the processes in the above cycle are internally reversible except for the throttling       ideal vapor-
process. Despite the inclusion of this irreversible process, the cycle is commonly referred to    compression cycle
as the ideal vapor-compression cycle.

   The following example illustrates the application of the first and second laws of thermo-
dynamics along with property data to analyze an ideal vapor-compression cycle.

E X A M P L E 1 0 . 1 Ideal Vapor-Compression Refrigeration Cycle

Refrigerant 134a is the working fluid in an ideal vapor-compression refrigeration cycle that communicates thermally with a
cold region at 0C and a warm region at 26C. Saturated vapor enters the compressor at 0C and saturated liquid leaves the
condenser at 26C. The mass flow rate of the refrigerant is 0.08 kg/s. Determine (a) the compressor power, in kW, (b) the re-
frigeration capacity, in tons, (c) the coefficient of performance, and (d) the coefficient of performance of a Carnot refrigera-
tion cycle operating between warm and cold regions at 26 and 0C, respectively.

SOLUTION

Known: An ideal vapor-compression refrigeration cycle operates with Refrigerant 134a. The states of the refrigerant enter-
ing the compressor and leaving the condenser are specified, and the mass flow rate is given.

Find: Determine the compressor power, in kW, the refrigeration capacity, in tons, coefficient of performance, and the
coefficient of performance of a Carnot vapor refrigeration cycle operating between warm and cold regions at the specified
temperatures.
460 Chapter 10 Refrigeration and Heat Pump Systems
    Schematic and Given Data:

      Warm region TH = 26°C = 299 K
                            Q· out

   3             Condenser   2s

                                                  T

      Expansion  Compressor                W·c                                       2s
      valve                                                                       a
                                                  26°C          3                                   Temperature of
                                                                                      1             warm region
                 Evaporator                              0°C                                        Temperature of
4                                                                         4                         cold region

                                         1                                                            s

                          Q· in
      Cold region TC = 0°C = 273 K

                                                                                                                     Figure E10.1

Assumptions:

1. Each component of the cycle is analyzed as a control volume at steady state. The control volumes are indicated by dashed
lines on the accompanying sketch.
2. Except for the expansion through the valve, which is a throttling process, all processes of the refrigerant are internally
reversible.
3. The compressor and expansion valve operate adiabatically.
4. Kinetic and potential energy effects are negligible.
5. Saturated vapor enters the compressor, and saturated liquid leaves the condenser.

     Analysis: Let us begin by fixing each of the principal states located on the accompanying schematic and T­s diagrams.

     At the inlet to the compressor, the refrigerant is a saturated vapor at 0C, so from Table A-10, h1  247.23 kJ/kg and s1 
     0.9190 kJ/kg # K.

         The pressure at state 2s is the saturation pressure corresponding to 26C, or p2  6.853 bar. State 2s is fixed by p2 and the

     fact that the specific entropy is constant for the adiabatic, internally reversible compression process. The refrigerant at state

 2s is a superheated vapor with h2s  264.7 kJ/Kg.

         State 3 is saturated liquid at 26C, so h3  85.75 kJ/kg. The expansion through the valve is a throttling process (assump-
     tion 2), so h4  h3.

(a) The compressor work input is

                                                   #       #    1h2s         h12
                                                  Wc      m

         #
where m is the mass flow rate of refrigerant. Inserting values

                                     #                                                   1 kW

                                     Wc    10.08 kg/s21264.7       247.232        kJ/kg  `       `
                                                                                         1 kJ/s

                                          1.4 kW
                                                            10.2 Analyzing Vapor-Compression Refrigeration Systems 461

   (b) The refrigeration capacity is the heat transfer rate to the refrigerant passing through the evaporator. This is given by

               #       #  1  h1              h42
              Qin     m

                     10.08 kg/s2|60 s/min|1247.23  85.752 kJ/kg ` 1 ton `
                                                                               211 kJ/min

                     3.67 ton

   (c) The coefficient of performance  is

                                             #

                          b                  Qin    h1    h4    247.23  85.75     9.24
                                              #     h2s   h1    264.7  247.23
                                             Wc

   (d) For a Carnot vapor refrigeration cycle operating at TH  299 K and TC  273 K, the coefficient of performance deter-
   mined from Eq. 10.1 is

                                                    bmax    TH  TC  TC    10.5
                                                                

    The value for h2s can be obtained by double interpolation in Table A-12 or by using Interactive Thermodynamics: IT.
    As expected, the ideal vapor-compression cycle has a lower coefficient of performance than a Cornot cycle operating

       between the temperatures of the warm and cold regions. The smaller value can be attributed to the effects of the external

       irreversibility associated with desuperheating the refrigerant in the condenser (Process 2s­a on the T­s diagram) and the

       internal irreversibility of the throttling process.

ACTUAL CYCLE. Figure 10.5 illustrates several features exhibited by actual vapor-
compression systems. As shown in the figure, the heat transfers between the refrigerant
and the warm and cold regions are not accomplished reversibly: the refrigerant tempera-
ture in the evaporator is less than the cold region temperature, TC, and the refrigerant
temperature in the condenser is greater than the warm region temperature, TH. Such irre-
versible heat transfers have a significant effect on performance. In particular, the coeffi-
cient of performance decreases as the average temperature of the refrigerant in the
evaporator decreases and as the average temperature of the refrigerant in the condenser
increases. Example 10.2 provides an illustration.

T                2
              2s

   3                Temperature of
           4        warm region, TH

                        Temperature of
                        cold region, TC
              1

                                                           Figure 10.5 T­s diagram of an

                      s                                   actual vapor-compression cycle.
462 Chapter 10 Refrigeration and Heat Pump Systems

    E X A M P L E 1 0 . 2 Effect of Irreversible Heat Transfer on Performance

    Modify Example 10.1 to allow for temperature differences between the refrigerant and the warm and cold regions as follows.
    Saturated vapor enters the compressor at 10C. Saturated liquid leaves the condenser at a pressure of 9 bar. Determine for
    the modified vapor-compression refrigeration cycle (a) the compressor power, in kW, (b) the refrigeration capacity, in tons,
    (c) the coefficient of performance. Compare results with those of Example 10.1.

    SOLUTION
    Known: An ideal vapor-compression refrigeration cycle operates with Refrigerant 134a as the working fluid. The evapora-
    tor temperature and condenser pressure are specified, and the mass flow rate is given.
    Find: Determine the compressor power, in kW, the refrigeration capacity, in tons, and the coefficient of performance. Com-
    pare results with those of Example 10.1.
    Schematic and Given Data:

     T                                                         Assumptions:
                3 9 bar
                                      2s
­10°C                                                        1. Each component of the cycle is analyzed as a control volume at steady
                         4                                   state. The control volumes are indicated by dashed lines on the sketch ac-

                                                               companying Example 10.1.

                                                        26°C 2. Except for the process through the expansion valve, which is a throt-
                                                                    tling process, all processes of the refrigerant are internally reversible.

                                                        0°C    3. The compressor and expansion valve operate adiabatically.

                                                               4. Kinetic and potential energy effects are negligible.

                                          1                    5. Saturated vapor enters the compressor, and saturated liquid exits the

                                                                    condenser.
                                                             s

                                                                      Figure E10.2

Analysis: Let us begin by fixing each of the principal sates located on the accompanying T­s diagram. Starting at the

inlet to the compressor, the refrigerant is a saturated vapor at 10C, so from Table A-10, h1  241.35 kJ/kg and s1 
0.9253 kJ/kg # K.

    The superheated vapor at state 2s is fixed by p2  9 bar and the fact that the specific entropy is constant for the adiabatic,
internally reversible compression process. Interpolating in Table A-12 gives h2s  272.39 kJ/kg.

    State 3 is a saturated liquid at 9 bar, so h3  99.56 kJ/kg. The expansion through the valve is a throttling process; thus,
h4  h3.

(a) The compressor power input is

                                                                #          #    1h2s    h12
                                                               Wc         m

where   #  is  the  mass  flow  rate  of  refrigerant.       Inserting  values
       m

                                              #         10.08  kg/ s2 1 272.39        241.352  kJ/kg  `  1  kW    `
                                             Wc                                                          1  kJ/s

                                                     2.48 kW

(b) The refrigeration capacity is

                                 #            #  1  h1    h42
                                Qin          m

                                           10.08 kg/s2 060 s/min 0 1241.35  99.562 kJ/kg ` 1 ton `
                                                                                                     211 kJ/min

                                           3.23 ton
                                                               10.2 Analyzing Vapor-Compression Refrigeration Systems 463

(c) The coefficient or performance  is

                                             #

    b                                     Qin         h1  h4     241.35  99.56     4.57
                                           #          h2s  h1    272.39  241.35
                                          Wc

    Comparing the results of the present example with those of Example 10.1, we see that the power input required by the
compressor is greater in the present case. Furthermore, the refrigeration capacity and coefficient of performance are smaller
in this example than in Example 10.1. This illustrates the considerable influence on performance of irreversible heat transfer
between the refrigerant and the cold and warm regions.

   Referring again to Fig. 10.5, we can identify another key feature of actual vapor-
compression system performance. This is the effect of irreversibilities during compression,
suggested by the use of a dashed line for the compression process from state 1 to state 2.
The dashed line is drawn to show the increase in specific entropy that would accompany an
adiabatic irreversible compression. Comparing cycle 1­2­3­4­1 with cycle 1­2s­3­4­1, the
refrigeration capacity would be the same for each, but the work input would be greater in
the case of irreversible compression than in the ideal cycle. Accordingly, the coefficient of
performance of cycle 1­2­3­4­1 is less than that of cycle 1­2s­3­4­1. The effect of irre-
versible compression can be accounted for by using the isentropic compressor efficiency,
which for states designated as in Fig. 10.5 is given by

                                          #  m# 2s      h2s  h1
                                        1Wc             h2  h1
hc                                        #
                                        1Wc     m# 2

Additional departures from ideality stem from frictional effects that result in pressure drops
as the refrigerant flows through the evaporator, condenser, and piping connecting the vari-
ous components. These pressure drops are not shown on the T­s diagram of Fig. 10.5 and
are ignored in subsequent discussions for simplicity.

   Finally, two additional features exhibited by actual vapor-compression systems are shown
in Fig. 10.5. One is the superheated vapor condition at the evaporator exit (state 1), which
differs from the saturated vapor condition shown in Fig. 10.4. Another is the subcooling of
the condenser exit state (state 3), which differs from the saturated liquid condition shown in
Fig. 10.4.

   Example 10.3 illustrates the effects of irreversible compression and condenser exit sub-
cooling on the performance of the vapor-compression refrigeration system.

E X A M P L E 1 0 . 3 Actual Vapor-Compression Refrigeration Cycle

Reconsider the vapor-compression refrigeration cycle of Example 10.2, but include in the analysis that the compressor has an
efficiency of 80%. Also, let the temperature of the liquid leaving the condenser be 30C. Determine for the modified cycle
(a) the compressor power, in kW, (b) the refrigeration capacity, in tons, (c) the coefficient of performance, and (d) the rates
of exergy destruction within the compressor and expansion valve, in kW, for T0  299 K (26C).

SOLUTION

Known: A vapor-compression refrigeration cycle has a compressor efficiency of 80%.

Find: Determine the compressor power, in kW, the refrigeration capacity, in tons, the coefficient of performance, and the
rates of exergy destruction within the compressor and expansion valve, in kW.
464 Chapter 10 Refrigeration and Heat Pump Systems

Schematic and Given Data:

     T                                2 p2 = 9 bar                      Assumptions:
                                   2s
 30°C 3                                                                 1. Each component of the cycle is analyzed as a control vol-
­10°C                                       T0 = 26°C = 299 K           ume at steady state.
                                    1                                   2. There are no pressure drops through the evaporator and
                    4                                                   condenser.
                                                         s              3. The compressor operates adiabatically with an efficiency of
                                                                        80%. The expansion through the valve is a throttling process.
                                                                        4. Kinetic and potential energy effects are negligible.
                                                                        5. Saturated vapor at 10C enters the compressor, and liquid
                                                                        at 30C leaves the condenser.
                                                                        6. The environment temperature for calculating exergy is T0 
                                                                        299 K (26C).
                                                                         Figure E10.3

Analysis: Let us begin by fixing the principal states. State 1 is the same as in Example 10.2, so h1  241.35 kJ/kg and s1 
0.9253 kJ/kg # K.

Owing to the presence of irreversibilities during the adiabatic compression process, there is an increase in specific entropy

from compressor inlet to exit. The state at the compressor exit, state 2, can be fixed using the compressor efficiency

                                                             1   #  m# 2s    1h2s  h12
                                                                Wc           1h2  h12

                                                       hc        #  m#
                                                                Wc

where h2s is the specific enthalpy at state 2s, as indicated on the accompanying T­s diagram. From the solution to Example 10.2,
h2s  272.39 kJ/kg. Solving for h2 and inserting known values

                       h2          h2s    h1       h1      1272.39  241.352    241.35     280.15  kJ/kg
                                      hc                          10.802

State 2 is fixed by the value of specific enthalpy h2 and the pressure, p2  9 bar. Interpolating in Table A-12, the specific en-
tropy is s2  0.9497 kJ/kg # K.

    The state at the condenser exit, state 3, is in the liquid region. The specific enthalpy is approximated using Eq. 3.14, to-

gether with saturated liquid data at 30C, as follows: h3  hf  91.49 kJ/kg. Similarly, with Eq. 6.7, s3  sf  0.3396 kJ/kg # K.
    The expansion through the valve is a throttling process; thus, h4  h3. The quality and specific entropy at state 4 are,

respectively

                                             x4    h4  hf4          91.49  36.97        0.2667
                                                   hg4  hf4             204.39

and

                             s4  sf4  x41sg4  sf42
                                 0.1486  10.2667210.9253  0.14862  0.3557 kJ/kg # K

(a) The compressor power is

                              #       #   1  h2    h12
                             Wc      m

                                    10.08 kg/s2 1280.15  241.352 kJ/kg ` 1 kW `  3.1 kW
                                                                                    1 kJ/s

(b) The refrigeration capacity is

                              #       #  1h1     h42
                             Qin     m

                                    10.08 kg/s2 060 s/min 0 1241.35  91.492 kJ/kg ` 1 ton `
                                                                                               211 kJ/min

                                    3.41 ton
                                                                                                                                           10.3 Refrigerant Properties 465

  (c) The coefficient of performance is

                                            b        1h1      h42    1241.35  91.492                                           3.86
                                                     1h2      h12    1280.15  241.352

  (d) The   rates of exergy   dE#edstrucTt0iso# ncv,inwthheerecos#mcvpirsesthsoe rraatnedoefxepnatnrosipoynpvraoldvuecctiaonn  be found  by reducing the exergy rate balance
  or using  the relationship                                                                                                   from an   entropy rate balance. With either ap-

  proach, the rates or exergy destruction for the compressor and valve are, respectively

                                      #         #    1  s2    s12    and   #                  #                                1  s4     s32
                                     1Ed2c     mT0                        1Ed2valve          mT0

  Substituting values

                              #               kg                                     kJ 1 kW

                              1Ed2c    a0.08  s   b  1299   K2 10.9497    0.92532      #  K  `                                 kJ/s   `    0.58  kW
                                                                                   kg        1

  and

                                               #
                                              1Ed2valve  10.082 12992 10.3557  0.33962  0.39 kW

   Irreversibilities in the compressor result in an increased compressor power requirement compared to the isentropic com-

      pression of Example 10.2. As a consequence, the coefficient of performance is lower.

   The exergy destruction rates calculated in part (d) measure the effect of irreversibilities as the refrigerant flows through

      the compressor and valve. The percentages of the power input (exergy input) to the compressor destroyed in the com-

      pressor and valve are 18.7 and 12.6%, respectively.

10.3 Refrigerant Properties                                                                                                                          p­h diagram

From about 1940 to the early 1990s, the most common class of refrigerants used in vapor-
compression refrigeration systems was the chlorine-containing CFCs (chlorofluorocarbons).
Refrigerant 12 (CCl2F2) is one of these. Owing to concern about the effects of chlorine in
refrigerants on the earth's protective ozone layer, international agreements have been imple-
mented to phase out the use of CFCs. Classes of refrigerants containing various amounts of
hydrogen in place of chlorine atoms have been developed that have less potential to deplete
atmospheric ozone than do more fully chlorinated ones, such as Refrigerant 12. One such
class, the HFCs, contain no chlorine. Refrigerant 134a (CF3CH2F) is the HFC considered by
many to be an environmentally acceptable substitute for Refrigerant 12, and Refrigerant 134a
has replaced Refrigerant 12 in many applications.

    Refrigerant 22 (CHClF2) is in the class called HCFCs that contains some hydrogen in
place of the chlorine atoms. Although Refrigerant 22 and other HCFCs are widely used today,
discussions are under way that will likely result in phasing out their use at some time in the
future. Ammonia (NH3), which was widely used in the early development of vapor-
compression refrigeration, is again receiving some interest as an alternative to the CFCs
because it contains no chlorine. Ammonia is also important in the absorption refrigeration
systems discussed in Section 10.5. Hydrocarbons such as propane (C3H8) and methane (CH4)
are also under investigation for use as refrigerants.

    Thermodynamic property data for ammonia, propane, and Refrigerants 22 and 134a are
included in the appendix tables. These data allow us to study refrigeration and heat pump
systems in common use and to investigate some of the effects on refrigeration cycles of us-
ing alternative working fluids.

    A thermodynamic property diagram widely used in the refrigeration field is the
pressure­enthalpy or p­h diagram. Figure 10.6 shows the main features of such a property
466 Chapter 10 Refrigeration and Heat Pump Systems

Thermodynamics in the News...

New Materials May Revive                                          better thermoelectric
Thermoelectric Cooling                                            materials by alter-
                                                                  nately depositing 1- to
You can buy a thermoelectric cooler powered from the ciga-        4-nanometer films of
rette lighter outlet of your car. The same technology is used in  different materials on
space applications. These simple coolers have no moving parts     the same base. These
and use no ozone-depleting refrigerants. Despite such advan-      nanoengineered ma-
tages, thermoelectric cooling has found only specialized ap-      terials hold promise
plication because of low coefficients of performance that don't   for cooling electronic
allow them to compete with commonplace vapor-compression          circuits, and perhaps
systems. However, new materials and novel production meth-        even for improved
ods involving engineering at a nanometer level may make           thermoelectric coolers.
thermoelectrics more competitive, material scientists say.
                                                                      New materials are
    The basis of thermoelectric cooling is two dissimilar semi-   closing the perform-
conductors coming together in specially designed electric         ance gap, but much re-
circuits. Effective materials for thermoelectric cooling must     mains to be done be-
have low thermal conductivity and high electrical conductiv-      fore thermoelectric refrigerators are commonplace. Still, a vast
ity, a rare combination in nature. One laboratory has produced    market would be served if researchers succeed.

diagram. The principal states of the vapor-compression cycles of Fig. 10.5 are located on this
p­h diagram. It is left as an exercise to sketch the cycles of Examples 10.1, 10.2, and 10.3
on p­h diagrams. Property tables and p­h diagrams for many refrigerants are given in hand-
books dealing with refrigeration.

SELECTING REFRIGERANTS. The temperatures of the refrigerant in the evaporator and
condenser are governed by the temperatures of the cold and warm regions, respectively, with
which the system interacts thermally. This, in turn, determines the operating pressures in
the evaporator and condenser. Consequently, the selection of a refrigerant is based partly
on the suitability of its pressure­temperature relationship in the range of the particular ap-
plication. It is generally desirable to avoid excessively low pressures in the evaporator and
excessively high pressures in the condenser. Other considerations in refrigerant selection in-
clude chemical stability, toxicity, corrosiveness, and cost. The type of compressor also af-
fects the choice of refrigerant. Centrifugal compressors are best suited for low evaporator
pressures and refrigerants with large specific volumes at low pressure. Reciprocating com-
pressors perform better over large pressure ranges and are better able to handle low specific
volume refrigerants.

p                                                                 Constant s

      Condenser

   3  pressure                                                    2s 2

      Evaporator
       pressure

   4                                                1                             Figure 10.6 Principal features of the
                                                                                 pressure­enthalpy diagram for a typical
                                                                  Constant T     refrigerant, with vapor-compression cycles
                                                                              h  superimposed.
                                                                                10.4 Cascade and Multistage Vapor-Compression Systems 467

10.4 Cascade and Multistage
           Vapor-Compression Systems

Variations of the basic vapor-compression refrigeration cycle are used to improve perform-
ance or for special applications. Two variations are presented in this section. The first is a
combined cycle arrangement in which refrigeration at relatively low temperature is achieved
through a series of vapor-compression systems, with each normally employing a different re-
frigerant. In the second variation, the work of compression is reduced through multistage
compression with intercooling between the stages. These variations are analogous to power
cycle modifications considered in Chaps. 8 and 9.

 10.4.1 Cascade Cycles

Combined cycle arrangements for refrigeration are called cascade cycles. In Fig. 10.7 a cas-

cade cycle is shown in which two vapor-compression refrigeration cycles, labeled A and B,

are arranged in series with a counterflow heat exchanger linking them. In the intermediate

heat exchanger, the energy rejected during condensation of the refrigerant in the lower-

temperature cycle A is used to evaporate the refrigerant in the higher-temperature cycle B.

The desired refrigeration effect occurs in the low-temperature evaporator, and heat rejection

from the overall cycle occurs in the high-temperature condenser. The coefficient of

performance is the ratio of the refrigeration effect to the total work input

                                                         #

                                     b #                 Qin
                                                              #

                                     WcA  WcB

           Q· out

       High-temperature

7      condenser         6

Expansion                                         W· cB
valve                    Compressor

           Cycle B

8      Intermediate         5

       heat exchanger

3                        2

           Cycle A                   W· cA

                         Compressor

Expansion

valve

4      Low-temperature      1

       evaporator

           Q· in                                          Figure 10.7 Example of a cascade
                                                         vapor-compression refrigeration cycle.
468 Chapter 10 Refrigeration and Heat Pump Systems

                                The mass flow rates in cycles A and B normally would be different. However, the mass flow
                                rates are related by mass and energy rate balances on the interconnecting counterflow heat ex-
                                changer serving as the condenser for cycle A and the evaporator for cycle B. Although only two
                                cycles are shown in Fig. 10.7, cascade cycles may employ three or more individual cycles.

                                    A significant feature of the cascade system illustrated in Fig. 10.7 is that the refrigerants
                                in the two or more stages can be selected to have reasonable evaporator and condenser pres-
                                sures in the two or more temperature ranges. In a double cascade system, a refrigerant would
                                be selected for cycle A that has a saturation pressure­temperature relationship that allows re-
                                frigeration at a relatively low temperature without excessively low evaporator pressures. The
                                refrigerant for cycle B would have saturation characteristics that permit condensation at the
                                required temperature without excessively high condenser pressures.

                                 10.4.2 Multistage Compression with Intercooling

                                The advantages of multistage compression with intercooling between stages have been cited
                                in Sec. 9.8, dealing with gas power systems. Intercooling is achieved in gas power systems
                                by heat transfer to the lower-temperature surroundings. In refrigeration systems, the refrig-
                                erant temperature is below that of the surroundings for much of the cycle, so other means
                                must be employed to accomplish intercooling and achieve the attendant savings in the required
                                compressor work input. One arrangement for two-stage compression using the refrigerant
                                itself for intercooling is shown in Fig. 10.8. The principal states of the refrigerant for an ideal
                                cycle are shown on the accompanying T­s diagram.

                  Q· out
      (1)

      Condenser

5                                4

       Expansion                                          W· c2
          valve                  Compressor

(1)

 6                                        3 (1)      T                            a
                             9   Direct contact  W· c1
                                 heat exchanger                                4
                            (x)   2 (1 ­ x)                                         2
 Flash
chamber                           Compressor                                  3
                                                                          9
   7  (1 ­ x)                             1                        5
                                  (1 ­ x)                        7                1
      Expansion                                                                             s
         valve                                                         6

8                                                                     8

                 Evaporator

 Figure 10.8       Q· in
intercooling.     Refrigeration cycle with two stages of compression and flash
10.5 Absorption Refrigeration 469

   Intercooling is accomplished in this cycle by means of a direct contact heat exchanger.         flash chamber
Relatively low-temperature saturated vapor enters the heat exchanger at state 9, where it
mixes with higher-temperature refrigerant leaving the first compression stage at state 2. A
single mixed stream exits the heat exchanger at an intermediate temperature at state 3 and is
compressed in the second compressor stage to the condenser pressure at state 4. Less work
is required per unit of mass flow for compression from 1 to 2 followed by compression from
3 to 4 than for a single stage of compression 1­2­a. Since the refrigerant temperature en-
tering the condenser at state 4 is lower than for a single stage of compression in which the
refrigerant would enter the condenser at state a, the external irreversibility associated with
heat transfer in the condenser is also reduced.

   A central role is played in the cycle of Fig. 10.8 by a liquid­vapor separator, called a flash
chamber. Refrigerant exiting the condenser at state 5 expands through a valve and enters the
flash chamber at state 6 as a two-phase liquid­vapor mixture with quality x. In the flash
chamber, the liquid and vapor components separate into two streams. Saturated vapor exit-
ing the flash chamber enters the heat exchanger at state 9, where intercooling is achieved as
discussed above. Saturated liquid exiting the flash chamber at state 7 expands through a sec-
ond valve into the evaporator. On the basis of a unit of mass flowing through the condenser,
the fraction of the vapor formed in the flash chamber equals the quality x of the refrigerant
at state 6. The fraction of the liquid formed is then (1  x). The fractions of the total flow
at various locations are shown in parentheses on Fig. 10.8.

10.5 Absorption Refrigeration                                                                      absorption refrigeration

Absorption refrigeration cycles are the subject of this section. These cycles have some fea-
tures in common with the vapor-compression cycles considered previously but differ in two
important respects:

 One is the nature of the compression process. Instead of compressing a vapor between
   the evaporator and the condenser, the refrigerant of an absorption system is absorbed
   by a secondary substance, called an absorbent, to form a liquid solution. The liquid
   solution is then pumped to the higher pressure. Because the average specific volume of
   the liquid solution is much less than that of the refrigerant vapor, significantly less work
   is required (see the discussion of Eq. 6.53b in Sec. 6.9). Accordingly, absorption
   refrigeration systems have the advantage of relatively small work input compared
   to vapor-compression systems.

 The other main difference between absorption and vapor-compression systems is that
   some means must be introduced in absorption systems to retrieve the refrigerant vapor
   from the liquid solution before the refrigerant enters the condenser. This involves heat
   transfer from a relatively high-temperature source. Steam or waste heat that otherwise
   would be discharged to the surroundings without use is particularly economical for this
   purpose. Natural gas or some other fuel can be burned to provide the heat source, and
   there have been practical applications of absorption refrigeration using alternative
   energy sources such as solar and geothermal energy.

   The principal components of an absorption refrigeration system are shown schematically
in Fig. 10.9. In this case, ammonia is the refrigerant and water is the absorbent. Ammonia
circulates through the condenser, expansion valve, and evaporator as in a vapor-compression
system. However, the compressor is replaced by the absorber, pump, generator, and valve
shown on the right side of the diagram.

 In the absorber, ammonia vapor coming from the evaporator at state 1 is absorbed by               absorber
   liquid water. The formation of this liquid solution is exothermic. Since the amount of
470 Chapter 10 Refrigeration and Heat Pump Systems

                                  Q· out                        Q· G  High-
                                                    Generator         temperature
                         Condenser                                    source
           3
                                                    2
                 Expansion
                    valve                              Weak solution                 b
                                                                                     Strong solutionc
           4
                         Evaporator                                   Valve
                                  Q· in
                        Refrigerated                                  Pump
                            region
                                                       Absorber                                       W· p

                                                    1

                                                                           a                                 Figure 10.9 Simple
                                                                                                            ammonia­water absorption
                                                                      Cooling                               refrigeration system.
                                                                       water

generator     ammonia that can be dissolved in water increases as the solution temperature decreases,
rectifier     cooling water is circulated around the absorber to remove the energy released as ammo-
              nia goes into solution and maintain the temperature in the absorber as low as possible.
              The strong ammonia­water solution leaves the absorber at point a and enters the pump,
              where its pressure is increased to that of the generator.

            In the generator, heat transfer from a high-temperature source drives ammonia vapor
              out of the solution (an endothermic process), leaving a weak ammonia­water solution in
              the generator. The vapor liberated passes to the condenser at state 2, and the remaining
              weak solution at c flows back to the absorber through a valve. The only work input is
              the power required to operate the pump, and this is small in comparison to the work
              that would be required to compress refrigerant vapor between the same pressure levels.
              However, costs associated with the heat source and extra equipment not required by
              vapor-compressor systems can cancel the advantage of a smaller work input.

              Ammonia­water systems normally employ several modifications of the simple absorption
           cycle considered above. Two common modifications are illustrated in Fig. 10.10. In this cy-
           cle, a heat exchanger is included between the generator and the absorber that allows the
           strong water­ammonia solution entering the generator to be preheated by the weak solution
           returning# from the generator to the absorber, thereby reducing the heat transfer to the gen-
           erator, QG. The other modification shown on the figure is the rectifier placed between the
           generator and the condenser. The function of the rectifier is to remove any traces of water
           from the refrigerant before it enters the condenser. This eliminates the possibility of ice
           formation in the expansion valve and the evaporator.

              Another type of absorption system uses lithium bromide as the absorbent and water as the
           refrigerant. The basic principle of operation is the same as for ammonia­water systems. To
           achieve refrigeration at lower temperatures than are possible with water as the refrigerant, a
           lithium bromide­water absorption system may be combined with another cycle using a re-
           frigerant with good low-temperature characteristics, such as ammonia, to form a cascade
           refrigeration system.
                                                                                       10.6 Heat Pump Systems 471

              Q· out                Rectifier
                                           Q· G
                                 2
     Condenser

3

                                    Generator

Expansion
   valve

                        Heat
                     exchanger

4                    Valve                     Pump
                                                      ·
     Evaporator                                      Wp
              Q· in
                     1
                                   Absorber

                                    Q· cw                 Figure 10.10 Modified ammonia­water
                                                         absorption system.

10.6 Heat Pump Systems

The objective of a heat pump is to maintain the temperature within a dwelling or other building
above the temperature of the surroundings or to provide a heat transfer for certain industrial
processes that occur at elevated temperatures. Heat pump systems have many features in
common with the refrigeration systems considered thus far and may be of the vapor-
compression or absorption type. Vapor-compression heat pumps are well suited for space
heating applications and are commonly used for this purpose. Absorption heat pumps
have been developed for industrial applications and are also increasingly being used for space
heating. To introduce some aspects of heat pump operation, let us begin by considering
the Carnot heat pump cycle.

CARNOT HEAT PUMP CYCLE

By simply changing our viewpoint, we can regard the cycle shown in Fig.# 10.1 as a heat
pump. The objective of the cycle now, however, is to deliver the heat transfer Qout to the warm
region, which is the space to be heated. At steady state, the rate at which energy is supplied

to the warm region by #heat transfer is the sum of the energy supplied t# o the working fluid

from the cold region, Qin, and the net rate of work input to the cycle, Wnet. That is

                                               #         ##

                                             Qout  Qin  Wnet                           (10.8)
472 Chapter 10 Refrigeration and Heat Pump Systems

                   The coefficient of performance of any heat pump cycle is defined as the ratio of the heat-

                   ing effect to the net work required to achieve that effect. For the Carnot heat pump cycle of

                   Fig. 10.1

                                                       #   #    m#
                                           gmax       Wc  Qout   #
                                                                Wt
                                                          m#        m#

                                                     area 2­a­b­3­2
                                                       area 1­2­3­4­1

                                                          TH1sa  sb2     TH                     (10.9)

                                                      1TH  TC2 1sa  sb2 TH  TC

                   This equation, which corresponds to Eq. 5.10, represents the maximum theoretical coefficient
                   of performance for any heat pump cycle operation between two regions at temperatures TC
                   and TH. Actual heat pump systems have coefficients of performance that are lower than would
                   be calculated from Eq. 10.9.

                      A study of Eq. 10.9 shows that as the temperature TC of the cold region decreases, the co-
                   efficient of performance of the Carnot heat pump decreases. This trait is also exhibited by ac-
                   tual heat pump systems and suggests why heat pumps in which the role of the cold region is
                   played by the local atmosphere (air-source heat pumps) normally require backup systems to
                   provide heating on days when the ambient temperature becomes very low. If sources such as
                   well water or the ground itself are used, relatively high coefficients of performance can be
                   achieve despite low ambient air temperatures, and backup systems may not be required.

vapor-compression  VAPOR-COMPRESSION HEAT PUMPS
heat pump
                   Actual heat pump systems depart significantly from the Carnot cycle model. Most systems
                   in common use today are of the vapor-compression type. The method of analysis of vapor-
                   compression heat pumps is the same as that of vapor-compression refrigeration cycles con-
                   sidered previously. Also, the previous discussions concerning the departure of actual systems
                   from ideality apply for vapor-compression heat pump systems as for vapor-compression
                   refrigeration cycles.

                      As illustrated by Fig. 10.11, a typical vapor-compression heat pump for space heating
                   has the same basic components as the vapor-compression refrigeration system: compressor,

                              Inside                                                                 Outside
                                air                                                                     air

                              Condenser 3                 4                         Evaporator  Q· in

                   Q·out                   Expansion            W· c Compressor
                                              valve

                                                          2                      1

                    Figure 10.11 Air-source vapor-compression heat pump system.
                                                                     10.7 Gas Refrigeration Systems 473

               Expansion
                  valve

     Inside         Outside
heat exchanger  heat exchanger

Reversing
  valve

Heating mode                 W· c               Figure 10.12 Example of an air-to-air
Cooling mode

   Compressor

                                               reversing heat pump.

condenser, expansion valve, an#d evaporator. The objective of the syste# m is different, how-
ever. In a heat pump system, Qin comes from the surroundings, and Qout is directed to the
dwelling as the desired effect. A net work input is required to accomplish this effect.

The coefficient of performance of a simple vapor-compression heat pump with states as

designated on Fig. 10.11 is

                                      #    m#    h2  h3              (10.10)
                                     Qout        h2  h1
                             g        #
                                     Wc  m#

The value of  can never be less than unity.

Many possible sources are available for heat transfer to the refrigerant passing through

the evaporator. These include the outside air, the ground, and lake, river, or well water. Liq-

uid circulated through a solar collector and stored in an insulated tank also can be used as a

source for a heat pump. Industrial heat pumps employ waste heat or warm liquid or gas

streams as the low-temperature source and are capable of achieving relatively high condenser

temperatures.

In the most common type of vapor-compression heat pump for space heating, the evapo-

rator communicates thermally with the outside air. Such air-source heat pumps also can be        air-source heat pump

used to provide cooling in the summer with the use of a reversing valve, as illustrated in

Fig. 10.12. The solid lines show the flow path of the refrigerant in the heating mode, as de-

scribed previously. To use the same components as an air conditioner, the valve is actuated,

and the refrigerant follows the path indicated by the dashed line. In the cooling mode, the

outside heat exchanger becomes the condenser, and the inside heat exchanger becomes the

evaporator. Although heat pumps can be more costly to install and operate than other direct

heating systems, they can be competitive when the potential for dual use is considered.

10.7 Gas Refrigeration Systems                                                                   gas refrigeration systems

All refrigeration systems considered thus far involve changes in phase. Let us now turn to
gas refrigeration systems in which the working fluid remains a gas throughout. Gas refrig-
eration systems have a number of important applications. They are used to achieve very low
temperatures for the liquefaction of air and other gases and for other specialized applications
474 Chapter 10 Refrigeration and Heat Pump Systems

                                Warm region
                                    at TH

                                Q· out                                              T                             2
                                                                                                              2s

                                Heat exchanger                                             Constant pressure

                             3                         2           WW··ccy­cleW·=t               3
                       Turbine                     Compressor
                                                                                                                                 TH
                                                                                                                                 TC
                                                                                                                         1

                                Heat exchanger                                                                Constant pressure
                                                                                                 4s 4
                       4                            1
                                                                                                                                    s
                                Q· in                                                                   (b)

                                             Cold region
                                                 at TC

                                                  (a)
                        Figure 10.13 Brayton refrigeration cycle.

                       such as aircraft cabin cooling. The Brayton refrigeration cycle illustrates an important type
                       of gas refrigeration system.

Brayton refrigeration  BRAYTON REFRIGERATION CYCLE
cycle
                       The Brayton refrigeration cycle is the reverse of the closed Brayton power cycle introduced
                       in Sec. 9.6. A schematic of the reversed Brayton cycle is provided in Fig. 10.13a. The re-
                       frigerant gas, which may be air, enters the compressor at state 1, where the temperature is
                       somewhat below the temperature of the cold region, TC, and is compressed to state 2. The
                       gas is then cooled to state 3, where the gas temperature approaches the temperature of the
                       warm region, TH. Next, the gas is expanded to state 4, where the temperature, T4, is well be-
                       low that of the cold region. Refrigeration is achieved through heat transfer from the cold re-
                       gion to the gas as it passes from state 4 to state 1, completing the cycle. The T­s diagram in
                       Fig. 10.13b shows an ideal Brayton refrigeration cycle, denoted by 1­2s­3­4s­1, in which
                       all processes are assumed to be internally reversible and the processes in the turbine and
                       compressor are adiabatic. Also shown is the cycle 1­2­3­4­1, which suggests the effects of
                       irreversibilities during adiabatic compression and expansion. Frictional pressure drops have
                       been ignored.

                       CYCLE ANALYSIS. The method of analysis of the Brayton refrigeration cycle is similar to

                       that of the Brayton power cycle. Thus, at steady state the work of the compressor and the

                       turbine per unit of mass flow are, respectively

                                                #                                      #

                                             Wc       h2       h1  and                 Wt    h3    h4
                                              #                                         #
                                             m                                         m

                       In obtaining these expressions, heat transfer with the surroundings and changes in kinetic and
                       potential energy have been ignored. In contrast to the vapor-compression cycle of Fig. 10.2,
                                                                                           10.7 Gas Refrigeration Systems 475

the work developed by the turbine of a Brayton refrigeration cycle is significant relative to

the compressor work input.

The heat transfer from the cold region to the refrigerant gas circulating through the low-

pressure heat exchanger, the refrigeration effect, is

                                            #

                                         Qin      h1       h4
                                          #
                                         m

The coefficient of performance is the ratio of the refrigeration effect to the net work input:

                                Q# inm#                      1h1    h42                        (10.11)
         b                   #           #                   h12    1h3
                            Wc  m#      Wt  m#    1h2                      h42

In the next example, we illustrate the analysis of an ideal Brayton refrigeration cycle.

E X A M P L E 1 0 . 4 Ideal Brayton Refrigeration Cycle

Air enters the compressor of an ideal Brayton refrigeration cycle at 1 bar, 270K, with a volumetric flow rate of 1.4 m3/s. If
the compressor pressure ratio is 3 and the turbine inlet temperature is 300K, determine (a) the net power input, in kW,
(b) the refrigeration capacity, in kW, (c) the coefficient of performance.

SOLUTION
Known: An ideal Brayton refrigeration cycle operates with air. Compressor inlet conditions, the turbine inlet temperature,
and the compressor pressure ratio are given.
Find: Determine the net power input, in kW, the refrigeration capacity, in kW, and the coefficient of performance.
Schematic and Given Data:

         Q· out

T3 =                                                         T                         2s
300K

            Heat exchanger

3                                   2s

Turbine                     Compressor            W·cycle                p = 3 bars
                                                                T3 =
         Heat exchanger                                         300K                   1
                                                                                         T1 =
                                                                         3               270K

                                                                            p = 1 bar

4s                                  1
                                (AV)1 = 1.4 m3/s
                                    T1 = 270K
         Q· in                      p1 = 1 bar                      4s
                                                                                                            s
                                                                                                                     Figure E10.4

Assumptions:

1. Each component of the cycle is analyzed as a control volume at steady state. The control volumes are indicated by dashed
lines on the accompanying sketch.
2. The turbine and compressor processes are isentropic.
476 Chapter 10 Refrigeration and Heat Pump Systems

3. There are no pressure drops through the heat exchangers.
4. Kinetic and potential energy effects are negligible.
5. The working fluid is air modeled as an ideal gas.

Analysis: The analysis begins by determining the specific enthalpy at each numbered state of the cycle. At state 1, the tem-
perature is 270 K. From Table A-22, h1  270.11 kJ/kg, pr1  0.9590. Since the compressor process is isentropic, h2s can be
determined by first evaluating pr at state 2s. That is

                                          pr2     p2   pr1               1 3 2 1 0.9590 2    2.877
                                                  p1

Then, interpolating in Table A-22, we get h2s  370.1 kJ/kg.
    The temperature at state 3 is given as T3  300 K. From Table A-22, h3  300.19 kJ/kg, pr3  1.3860. The specific en-

thalpy at state 4s is found by using the isentropic relation

                                          pr4     pr3  p4           11.38602    1132         0.462
                                                       p3

Interpolating in Table A-22, we obtain h4s  219.0 kJ/kg.

(a) The net power input is

                                           #            #  3     1  h2s    h12    1h3        h4s2 4
                                          Wcycle       m

                                          #
This requires the mass flow rate m, which can be determined from the volumetric flow rate and the specific volume at the

compressor inlet:

                                                                     #    1AV21
                                                                    m
                                                                           v1

Since v1  (RM)T1p1

                                    #    1AV21p1
                                   m
                                         1RM2T1

                                          11.4 m3/s2 11 bar2               a 105 N/m2 b      a     1 kJ    b
                                         a 8.314 kJb 1270 K2                   1 bar            103 N #  m

                                          28.97

                                        1.807 kg/s

Finally

                     #             11.807 kg/s2 3 1370.1  270.112               1300.19         219.02 4  kJ/kg  a 1 kW b
                    Wcycle                                                                                        1 kJ/s

                             33.97 kW

(b) The refrigeration capacity is

                                    #     m# 1h1    h4s2
                                   Qin

                                         11.807 kg/s21270.11  2192 kJ/kg a 1 kW b
                                                                                        1 kJ/s

                                         92.36 kW

(c) The coefficient of performance is

                                                              #

                                                  b        Qin            92.36  2.72
                                                           #

                                                       Wcycle 33.97

                       Irreversibilities within the compressor and turbine serve to decrease the coefficient of per-
                    formance significantly from that of the corresponding ideal cycle because the compressor
                    work requirement is increased and the turbine work output is decreased. This is illustrated
                    in the example to follow.
                                                                                                               10.7 Gas Refrigeration Systems 477

E X A M P L E 1 0 . 5 Brayton Refrigeration Cycle with Irreversibilities

Reconsider Example 10.4, but include in the analysis that the compressor and turbine each have an isentropic efficiency of
80%. Determine for the modified cycle (a) the net power input, in kW, (b) the refrigeration capacity, in kW, (c) the coefficient
of performance, and interpret its value.

SOLUTION
Known: A Brayton refrigeration cycle operates with air. Compressor inlet conditions, the turbine inlet temperature, and the
compressor pressure ration are given. The compressor and turbine each have an efficiency of 80%.
Find: Determine the net power input and the refrigeration capacity, each in kW. Also, determine the coefficient of per-
formance and interpret its value.
Schematic and Given Data:

T                                        2

                     2s

              p = 3 bars                        T1 = 270 K                               Assumptions:

           3                                                                             1. Each component of the cycle is analyzed as a control volume at
                    T3 = 300 K                                                           steady state.
                                      1                                                  2. The compressor and turbine are adiabatic.
                   p = 1 bar                                                             3. There are no pressure drops through the heat exchangers.
                                                                                         4. Kinetic and potential energy effects are negligible.
                                                                                         5. The working fluid is air modeled as an ideal gas.

                  4
           4s

                                                                                  s
                                                                                           Figure E10.5

Analysis:

(a) The power input to the compressor is evaluated using the isentropic compressor efficiency, c. That is

                                                                                      #      1   #  m# 2  s
                                                                                                Wc
                                                                                     Wc
                                                                                      #
                                                                                     m
                                                                                                hc

    The value of the work per unit mass for the isentropic compression, (W# cm# )s, is determined with data from the solution in

Example 10.4 as 99.99 kJ/kg. The actual power required is then

                                                 #       #     1  W# cm# 2s              11.807     kg/s2 199.99  kJ/kg2
                                                Wc      m                                               10.82

                                                                  hc

                                                     225.9 kW

 #   The  htut(rWb#itnem# )ps.oUwseirngoudtaptautfoirsmdtehteersmoilnuetidoninto  a similar  1m0.a4ngnievre, su(sWi#ntgm# t)hs e  turbine isentropic   efficiency t. Thus,
Wt                                                                                Example                                         81.19 kJ /kg. The   actual turbine work is
    m# 

then

                                             #       #  ht  1   #  m# 2           s    11.807   kg/s2 10.82 181.19  kJ/kg2
                                            Wt      m          Wt

                                                 117.4 kW

The net power input to the cycle is

                                                     #
                                                    Wcycle  225.9  117.4  108.5 kW
478 Chapter 10 Refrigeration and Heat Pump Systems

(mbi)neTdhbeyspseoclvifiincgeWn#tthalpmy# (aht3  the  turbine exit,      h4, is  rhe3quirWe#dttmo# .  evaluate the refrigeration   capacity.  This  enthalpy  can  be  deter-
                                                      h4) to obtain      h4                           Inserting known values

                                                                                        117.4
                                                                    h4     300.19       ab                    235.2  kJ/kg
                                                                                         1.807

The refrigeration capacity is then

                                                          #      #  1h1    h42     11.8072 1270.11              235.22      63.08  kW
                                                         Qin    m

(c) The coefficient of performance is

                                                                                   #

                                                                           b       Qin   63.08  0.581
                                                                                   #

                                                                                 Wcycle 108.5

The value of the coefficient of performance in this case is less than unity. This means that the refrigeration effect is smaller
than the net work required to achieve it. Additionally, note that irreversibilities in the compressor and turbine have a significant
effect on the performance of gas refrigeration systems. This is brought out by comparing the results of the present example
with those of Example 10.4. Irreversibilities result in an increase in the work of compression and a reduction in the work
output of the turbine. The refrigeration capacity is also reduced. The overall effect is that the coefficient of performance is
decreased significantly.

ADDITIONAL GAS REFRIGERATION APPLICATIONS

To obtain even moderate refrigeration capacities with the Brayton refrigeration cycle, equip-
ment capable of achieving relatively high pressures and volumetric flow rates is needed. For
most applications involving air conditioning and for ordinary refrigeration processes, vapor-
compression systems can be built more cheaply and can operate with higher coefficients of
performance than gas refrigeration systems. With suitable modifications, however, gas re-
frigeration systems can be used to achieve temperatures of about 150C, which are well
below the temperatures normally obtained with vapor systems.

   Figure 10.14 shows the schematic and T­s diagram of an ideal Brayton cycle modified
by the introduction of a regenerative heat exchanger. The heat exchanger allows the air en-
tering the turbine at state 3 to be cooled below the warm region temperature TH. In the sub-
sequent expansion through the turbine, the air achieves a much lower temperature at state 4
than would have been possible without the regenerative heat exchanger. Accordingly, the
refrigeration effect, achieved from state 4 to state b, occurs at a correspondingly lower average
temperature.

                                                      ·                                                                                T

                                                 Qin                       Heat                                                                                         2

                                                                            exchanger                                                                                      1
                                                              b                                                                                                    b

                                                                                                      a                     1                       a                               s

                                                 4                                                                                 TH         3
                                                          3
                                                                                                      Q· out         2

                                                                                                                                  W· cycle    4

                                                 Turbine                                                        Compressor

 Figure 10.14 Brayton refrigeration cycle with a regenerative heat exchanger.
                                                                 Chapter Summary and Study Guide 479

Ambient                           To
  air in                      combustor

                Main jet
                 engine
               compressor

Heat transfer
 to ambient

               Air extracted for
                cabin cooling

Auxiliary      Auxiliary
 turbine         power

                    Cool air
                    to cabin

                                          Figure 10.15 An application of gas
                                         refrigeration to aircraft cabin cooling.

   An example of the application of gas refrigeration to cabin cooling in an aircraft is
illustrated in Fig. 10.15. As shown in the figure, a small amount of high-pressure air is
extracted from the main jet engine compressor and cooled by heat transfer to the ambi-
ent. The high-pressure air is then expanded through an auxiliary turbine to the pressure
maintained in the cabin. The air temperature is reduced in the expansion and thus is able
to fulfill its cabin cooling function. As an additional benefit, the turbine expansion can
provide some of the auxiliary power needs of the aircraft. Size and weight are important
considerations in the selection of equipment for use in aircraft. Open-cycle systems, like
the example given here, utilize compact high-speed rotary turbines and compressors. Fur-
thermore, since the air for cooling comes directly from the surroundings, there are fewer
heat exchangers than would be needed if a separate refrigerant were circulated in a closed
vapor-compression cycle.

Chapter Summary and Study Guide

In this chapter we have considered refrigeration and heat        during the compression process and in the expansion across
pump systems, including vapor systems where the refrigerant      the valve, as well as the effect of irreversible heat transfer be-
is alternately vaporized and condensed, and gas systems where    tween the refrigerant and the warm and cold regions. Varia-
the refrigerant remains a gas. The three principal types of re-  tions of the basic vapor-compression refrigeration cycle also
frigeration and heat pump systems discussed are the vapor-       have been considered, including cascade cycles and multistage
compression, absorption, and reversed Brayton cycles.            compression with intercooling.

   The performance of simple vapor refrigeration systems is         Qualitative discussions are presented of refrigerant prop-
described in terms of the vapor-compression cycle. For this      erties and of considerations in selecting refrigerants. Absorp-
cycle, we have evaluated the principal work and heat trans-      tion refrigeration and heat pump systems are also discussed
fers along with two important performance parameters: the        qualitatively. A discussion of vapor-compression heat pump
coefficient of performance and the refrigeration capacity. We    systems is provided, and the chapter concludes with a study
have considered the effect on performance of irreversibilities   of gas refrigeration systems.
480 Chapter 10 Refrigeration and Heat Pump Systems

   The following list provides a study guide for this chapter.        apply the first and second laws along with property data
When your study of the text and end-of-chapter exercises has            to determine the performance of vapor-compression
been completed, you should be able to                                   refrigeration and heat pump cycles and of Brayton refrig-
                                                                        eration cycles, including evaluation of the power re-
 write out the meanings of the terms listed in the margin               quired, the coefficient of performance, and the capacity.
   throughout the chapter and understand each of the re-
   lated concepts. The subset of key concepts listed below            sketch schematic diagrams of vapor-compression cycle
   is particularly important.                                           modifications, including cascade cycles and multistage
                                                                        compression with intercooling between the stages. In
 sketch the T­s diagrams of vapor-compression refrigera-                each case be able to apply mass and energy balances,
   tion and heat pump cycles and of Brayton refrigeration               the second law, and property data to determine
   cycles, correctly showing the relationship of the refriger-          performance.
   ant temperature to the temperatures of the warm and
   cold regions.                                                      explain the operation of absorption refrigeration systems.

Key Engineering Concepts

vapor-compression        ton of                                      vapor-compression    Brayton refrigeration
   refrigeration p. 457     refrigeration p. 458                        heat pump p. 472     cycle p. 474

refrigeration            absorption
   capacity p. 458          refrigeration p. 469

Exercises: Things Engineers Think About

1. What are the temperatures inside the fresh food and freezer       7. You recharge your automobile air conditioner with refrigerant
compartments of your refrigerator? Do you know what values are       from time to time, yet seldom, if ever, your refrigerator. Why?
recommended for these temperatures?
                                                                     8. Would water be a suitable working fluid for use in a refrigerator?
2. How might the variation in the local ambient temperature
affect the thermal performance of an outdoor pop machine?            9. Sketch the T­s diagram of an ideal vapor-compression refrig-
                                                                     eration cycle in which the heat transfer to the warm region occurs
3. Explain how a household refrigerator can be viewed as a heat      with the working fluid at a supercritical pressure.
pump that heats the kitchen. If you knew the refrigerator's coef-
ficient of performance, could you calculate its coefficient of per-  10. Would you recommend a domestic heat pump for use in
formance when viewed as a heat pump?                                 Duluth, Minnesota? In San Diego, California?

4. If it takes about 335 kJ to freeze 1 kg of water, how much ice    11. What components are contained in the outside unit of a res-
could an ice maker having a 1-ton refrigeration capacity produce     idential heat pump?
in 24 hours?
                                                                     12. You see an advertisement for a natural gas­fired absorption
5. Using the T­s diagram of Fig. 10.1, an area interpretation of     refrigeration system. How can burning natural gas play a role in
the Carnot vapor refrigeration cycle coefficient of performance      achieving cooling?
is provided in Sec. 10.1. Can a similar area interpretation be
developed for the coefficient of performance of a vapor-             13. Referring to Fig. 10.13, why is the temperature TH the lim-
compression refrigeration cycle?                                     iting value for the temperature at state 3? What practical consid-
                                                                     erations might preclude this limit from being achieved?
6. Would you recommend replacing the expansion valve of
Example 10.3 by a turbine?                                           14. When a regenerator is added to the ideal Brayton refrigera-
                                                                     tion cycle, as in Fig. 10.14, does the coefficient of performance
                                                                     increase or decrease?

Problems: Developing Engineering Skills

Vapor Refrigeration Systems                                          (a) the work input to the compressor.
                                                                     (b) the work developed by the turbine.
10.1 A Carnot vapor refrigeration cycle uses Refrigerant 134a        (c) the heat transfer to the refrigerant passing through the
   as the working fluid. The refrigerant enters the condenser as
   saturated vapor at 28C and leaves as saturated liquid. The            evaporator.
   evaporator operates at a temperature of 10C. Determine, in
   kJ per kg of refrigerant flow,                                    What is the coefficient of performance of the cycle?
                                                                     Problems: Developing Engineering Skills 481

10.2 Refrigerant 22 is the working fluid in a Carnot vapor re-          liquid leaving the condenser be 32C. Determine, for the
   frigeration cycle for which the evaporator temperature is 0C.        modified cycle,
   Saturated vapor enters the condenser at 40C, and saturated
   liquid exits at the same temperature. The mass flow rate of re-      (a) the compressor power, in kW.
   frigerant is 3 kg/min. Determine                                     (b) the refrigerating capacity, in tons.
                                                                        (c) the coefficient of performance.
   (a) the rate of heat transfer to the refrigerant passing through     (d) the rates of exergy destruction in the compressor and
        the evaporator, in kW.
                                                                             expansion valve, each in kW, for T0  28C.
   (b) the net power input to the cycle, in kW.
   (c) the coefficient of performance.                               10.11 A vapor-compression refrigeration system circulates Re-
                                                                        frigerant 134a at a rate of 6 kg/min. The refrigerant enters the
10.3 An ideal vapor-compression refrigeration cycle operates at         compressor at 10C, 1.4 bar, and exits at 7 bar. The isen-
   steady state with Refrigerant 134a as the working fluid. Satu-       tropic compressor efficiency is 67%. There are no appreciable
   rated vapor enters the compressor at 10C, and saturated liq-         pressure drops as the refrigerant flows through the condenser
   uid leaves the condenser at 28C. The mass flow rate of               and evaporator. The refrigerant leaves the condenser at 7 bar,
   refrigerant is 5 kg/min. Determine                                   24C. Ignoring heat transfer between the compressor and its
                                                                        surroundings, determine
   (a) the compressor power, in kW.
   (b) the refrigerating capacity, in tons.                             (a) the coefficient of performance.
   (c) the coefficient of performance.                                  (b) the refrigerating capacity, in tons.
                                                                        (c) the rates of exergy destruction in the compressor and ex-
10.4 Modify the cycle in Problem 10.3 to have saturated vapor
   entering the compressor at 1.6 bar and saturated liquid leav-            pansion valve, each in kW.
   ing the condenser at 9 bar. Answer the same questions for the        (d) the changes in specific flow exergy of the refrigerant pass-
   modified cycle as in Problem 10.3.
                                                                             ing through the evaporator and condenser, respectively,
10.5 Plot each of the quantities calculated in Problem 10.4 ver-             each in kJ/kg.
   sus evaporator pressure ranging from 0.6 to 4 bar, while the
   condensor pressure remains fixed at 6, 9, and 12 bar.                Let T0  21C, p0  1 bar.

10.6 Refrigerant 22 enters the compressor of an ideal vapor-         10.12 If the minimum and maximum allowed refrigerant pres-
   compression refrigeration system as saturated vapor at 40C           sures are 1 and 10 bar, respectively, which of the following
   with a volumetric flow rate of 15 m3/min. The refrigerant leaves     can be used as the working fluid in a vapor-compression
   the condenser at 32C, 9 bar. Determine                               refrigeration system that maintains a cold region at 0C,
                                                                        while discharging energy by heat transfer to the surrounding
   (a) the compressor power, in kW.                                     air at 30C: Refrigerant 22, Refrigerant 134a, ammonia,
   (b) the refrigerating capacity, in tons.                             propane?
   (c) the coefficient of performance.
                                                                     10.13 In a vapor-compression refrigeration cycle, ammonia exits
10.7 An ideal vapor-compression refrigeration cycle, with am-           the evaporator as saturated vapor at 22C. The refrigerant
   monia as the working fluid, has an evaporator temperature of         enters the condenser at 16 bar and 160C, and saturated liquid
   20C and a condenser pressure of 12 bar. Saturated vapor              exits at 16 bar. There is no significant heat transfer between the
   enters the compressor, and saturated liquid exits the condenser.     compressor and its surroundings, and the refrigerant passes
   The mass flow rate of the refrigerant is 3 kg/min. Determine         through the evaporator with a negligible change in pressure. If
                                                                        the refrigerating capacity is 150 kW, determine
   (a) the coefficient of performance.
   (b) the refrigerating capacity, in tons.                             (a) the mass flow rate of refrigerant, in kg/s.
                                                                        (b) the power input to the compressor, in kW.
10.8 To determine the effect of changing the evaporator tem-            (c) the coefficient of performance.
   perature on the performance of an ideal vapor-compression re-        (d) the isentropic compressor efficiency.
   frigeration cycle, plot the coefficient of performance and the
   refrigerating capacity, in tons, for the cycle in Problem 10.7    10.14 A vapor-compression refrigeration system with a capac-
   for saturated vapor entering the compressor at temperatures          ity of 10 tons has superheated Refrigerant 134a vapor enter-
   ranging from 40 to 10C. All other conditions are the same            ing the compressor at 15C, 4 bar, and exiting at 12 bar. The
   as in Problem 10.7.                                                  compression process can be modeled by pv1.01  constant. At
                                                                        the condenser exit, the pressure is 11.6 bar, and the tempera-
10.9 To determine the effect of changing condenser pressure             ture is 44C. The condenser is water-cooled, with water enter-
   on the performance of an ideal vapor-compression refrigera-          ing at 20C and leaving at 30C with a negligible change in
   tion cycle, plot the coefficient of performance and the refrig-      pressure. Heat transfer from the outside of the condenser can
   erating capacity, in tons, for the cycle in Problem 10.7 for         be neglected. Determine
   condenser pressures ranging from 8 to 16 bar. All other con-
   ditions are the same as in Problem 10.7.                             (a) the mass flow rate of the refrigerant, in kg/s.
                                                                        (b) the power input and the heat transfer rate for the com-
10.10 Modify the cycle in Problem 10.4 to have an isentropic
   compressor efficiency of 80% and let the temperature of the               pressor, each in kW.
                                                                        (c) the coefficient of performance.
482 Chapter 10 Refrigeration and Heat Pump Systems

   (d) the mass flow rate of the cooling water, in kg/s.              10.17 Figure P10.17 shows a Refrigerant 22 vapor-compression
   (e) the rates of exergy destruction in the condenser and ex-          refrigeration system with mechanical subcooling. A counter-
                                                                         flow heat exchanger subcools a portion of the refrigerant leav-
       pansion valve, each expressed as a percentage of the power        ing the condenser below the ambient temperature as follows:
       input. Let T0  20C.                                               Saturated liquid exits the condenser at 12 bars. A portion of
                                                                         the flow exiting the condenser is diverted through an expan-
10.15 Figure P10.15 shows a steam jet refrigeration system that          sion valve and passes through the counterflow heat exchanger
   produces chilled water in a flash chamber. The chamber is             with no pressure drop, leaving as saturated vapor at 6C. The
   maintained at a vacuum pressure by the steam ejector, which           diverted flow is then compressed isentropically to 12 bars and
   removes the vapor generated by entraining it in the low-              reenters the condenser. The remainder of the flow exiting the
   pressure jet and discharging into the condenser. The vacuum           condenser passes through the other side of the heat exchanger
   pump removes air and other noncondensable gases from the              and exits at 40C, 12 bars. The evaporator has a capacity of
   condenser shell. For the conditions shown on the figure, de-          50 tons and produces 28C saturated vapor at its exit. In the
   termine the make-up water and cooling water flow rates, each          main compressor, the refrigerant is compressed isentropically
   in kg/h.                                                              to 12 bars. Determine at steady state

Saturated vapor                             Air                          (a) the mass flow rate at the inlet to each compressor, in
   at 200 kPa                                                                 kg/s.
                                      Vacuum
                 Ejector nozzle        pump                              (b) the power input to each compressor, in kW.
                 Steam jet                                               (c) the coefficient of performance.

Make-up                   Sat                                          Counterflow                         ·
  water                  vapor                                         heat exchanger                     Qout
at 15°C                                                                                Saturated liquid
                                                                      p4 = 12 bars       p3 = 12 bars
                                      p = 4 kPa                       T4 = 4°C               3

                                                                         4                            Condenser

                                        Condenser                                                Compressor
         5°C
                                                                         Expansion

                                                                         valve         7                           8

                                                                                       Saturated vapor       p8 = 12 bars  p2 = 12 bars
                                                                                                                           2
               Cooling                                                                 T7 = 6°C         ·
                 load                                                                                                                 W· c1
                                                                      Expansion                         Wc2
               142 tons
                         Cooling      Condensate                      valve
             Pump        water in        return
 25,000                  at 15°C        to drain                                                             Main
  kg/h
 Figure P10.15                  25°C                                  5                                      compressor

                                                                                       Evaporator                                1

                                                                                                                      Saturated vapor
                                                                                                                      T1 = 28°C

Cascade and Multistage Systems                                                                       Q· in

10.16 A vapor-compression refrigeration system uses the                Figure P10.17
   arrangement shown in Fig. 10.8 for two-stage compression with
   intercooling between the stages. Refrigerant 134a is the work-     10.18 Figure P10.18 shows the schematic diagram of a vapor-
   ing fluid. Saturated vapor at 30C enters the first compressor         compression refrigeration system with two evaporators using
   stage. The flash chamber and direct contact heat exchanger op-        Refrigerant 134a as the working fluid. This arrangement is used
   erate at 4 bar, and the condenser pressure is 12 bar. Saturated       to achieve refrigeration at two different temperatures with a
   liquid streams at 12 and 4 bar enter the high- and low-pressure       single compressor and a single condenser. The low-temperature
   expansion valves, respectively. If each compressor operates           evaporator operates at 18C with saturated vapor at its exit
   isentropically and the refrigerating capacity of the system is 10     and has a refrigerating capacity of 3 tons. The higher-
   tons, determine                                                       temperature evaporator produces saturated vapor at 3.2 bar at
                                                                         its exit and has a refrigerating capacity of 2 tons. Compression
   (a) the power input to each compressor, in kW.
   (b) the coefficient of performance.
                                                                    Problems: Developing Engineering Skills 483

                         Q·out                                                  ·
                                                                               Qout

3          Condenser                  2                                                               2
                                                                               Condenser
                                                 ·
                                                 Wc                                                                         ·
                         Compressor                                                                                        Wc
                                                                                         Compressor
Expansion

valve

4                                             1                     3                      1
      Evaporator
            2            7               8

    Q· in,2 = 2 tons               Expansion
Expansion                             valve
valve
                                                                                           Heat exchanger

                                                                    4

5          Evaporator              6

                      1

                 Q· in,1 = 3 tons                                   Expansion
 Figure P10.18                                                      valve

                                                                    5          Evaporator     6

   is isentropic to the condenser pressure of 10 bar. There are no                                              Q· in
   significant pressure drops in the flows through the condenser
   and the two evaporators, and the refrigerant leaves the con-              Figure P10.19
   denser as saturated liquid at 10 bar. Calculate
                                                                       evaporator, and saturated liquid at 8 bar leaves the condenser.
   (a) the mass flow rate of refrigerant through each evaporator,      Calculate
        in kg/min.
                                                                       (a) the power input to the compressor, in kW.
   (b) the compressor power input, in kW.                              (b) the coefficient of performance.
   (c) the rate of heat transfer from the refrigerant passing          (c) the coefficient of performance of a Carnot heat pump cycle

       through the condenser, in kW.                                       operating between thermal reservoirs at 20 and 5C.

10.19 An ideal vapor-compression refrigeration cycle is modi-       10.21 A vapor-compression heat pump system uses ammonia
   fied to include a counterflow heat exchanger, as shown in           as the working fluid. The refrigerant enters the compressor at
   Fig. P10.19. Ammonia leaves the evaporator as saturated vapor       2.5 bar, 5C, with a volumetric flow rate of 0.6 m3/min.
   at 1.0 bar and is heated at constant pressure to 5C before en-      Compression is adiabatic to 14 bar, 140C, and saturated liquid
   tering the compressor. Following isentropic compression to 18       exits the condenser at 14 bar. Determine
   bar, the refrigerant passes through the condenser, exiting at
   40C, 18 bar. The liquid then passes through the heat ex-            (a) the power input to the compressor, in kW.
   changer, entering the expansion valve at 18 bar. If the mass        (b) the heating capacity of the system, in kW and tons.
   flow rate of refrigerant is 12 kg/min, determine                    (c) the coefficient of performance.
                                                                       (d) the isentropic compressor efficiency.
   (a) the refrigeration capacity, in tons of refrigeration.
   (b) the compressor power input, in kW.                           10.22 On a particular day when the outside temperature is 5C,
   (c) the coefficient of performance.                                 a house requires a heat transfer rate of 12 kW to maintain the
                                                                       inside temperature at 20C. A vapor-compression heat pump
   Discuss possible advantages and disadvantages of this               with Refrigerant 22 as the working fluid is to be used to pro-
   arrangement.                                                        vide the necessary heating. Specify appropriate evaporator and
                                                                       condenser pressures of a cycle for this purpose. Let the re-
Vapor-Compression Heat Pump Systems                                    frigerant be saturated vapor at the evaporator exit and saturated
                                                                       liquid at the condenser exit. Calculate
10.20 An ideal vapor-compression heat pump cycle with Re-
   frigerant 134a as the working fluid provides heating at a rate      (a) the mass flow rate of refrigerant, in kg/min.
   of 15 kW to maintain a building at 20C when the outside             (b) the compressor power, in kW.
   temperature is 5C. Saturated vapor at 2.4 bar leaves the            (c) the coefficient of performance.
484 Chapter 10 Refrigeration and Heat Pump Systems

10.23 Repeat the calculations of Problem 10.22 for Refrigerant          Gas Refrigeration Systems
   134a as the working fluid. Compare the results with those of
   Problem 10.22 and discuss.                                           10.26 Air enters the compressor of an ideal Brayton refrigera-
                                                                           tion cycle at 100 kPa, 270 K. The compressor pressure ratio is
10.24 A vapor-compression heat pump with a heating capacity                3, and the temperature at the turbine inlet is 310 K. Determine
   of 500 kJ/min is driven by a power cycle with a thermal effi-
   ciency of 25%. For the heat pump, Refrigerant 134a is com-              (a) the net work input, per unit mass of air flow, in kJ/kg.
   pressed from saturated vapor at 10C to the condenser                    (b) the refrigeration capacity, per unit mass of air flow, in kJ/kg.
   pressure of 10 bar. The isentropic compressor efficiency is             (c) the coefficient of performance.
   80%. Liquid enters the expansion valve at 9.6 bar, 34C. For             (d) the coefficient of performance of a Carnot refrigeration cy-
   the power cycle, 80% of the heat rejected is transferred to the
   heated space.                                                                cle operating between thermal reservoirs at TC  270 K
                                                                                and TH  310 K, respectively.
   (a) Determine the power input to the heat pump compressor,
        in kW.                                                          10.27 Reconsider Problem 10.26, but include in the analysis
                                                                           that the compressor and turbine have isentropic efficiencies of
   (b) Evaluate the ratio of the total rate that heat is delivered to      80 and 88%, respectively. For the modified cycle
        the heated space to the rate of heat input to the power cycle.
        Discuss.                                                           (a) determine the coefficient of performance.
                                                                           (b) develop an exergy accounting of the compressor power in-
10.25 A residential heat pump system operating at steady state
   is shown schematically in Fig. P10.25. Refrigerant 22 circu-                 put, in kJ per kg of air flowing. Discuss
   lates through the components of the system, and property data
   at the numbered states are given on the figure. The compres-            Let T0  310 K.
   sor operates adiabatically. Kinetic and potential energy changes
   are negligible as are changes in pressure of the streams pass-       10.28 Plot the quantities calculated in parts (a) through (c) of
   ing through the condenser and evaporator. Let T0  273 K.                Problem 10.26 versus the compressor pressure ratio ranging
   Determine                                                               from 2 to 6. Repeat for compressor and turbine isentropic
                                                                           efficiencies of 95%, 90%, and 80%.
   (a) the power required by the compressor, in kW, and the isen-
        tropic compressor efficiency.                                   10.29 Air enters the compressor of an ideal Brayton refrigera-
                                                                           tion cycle at 140 kPa, 270 K, and is compressed to 420 kPa.
   (b) the coefficient of performance.                                     At the turbine inlet, the temperature is 320 K and the volu-
   (c) Perform a full exergy accounting of the compressor power            metric flow rate is 0.4 m3/s. Determine

       input, in kW. Discuss.                                              (a) the mass flow rate, in kg/s.
   (d) Devise and evaluate an exergetic efficiency for the heat            (b) the net power input, in kW.
                                                                           (c) the refrigerating capacity, in kW.
        pump system.                                                       (d) the coefficient of performance.

              Return air             Heated air                         10.30 Air enters the compressor of a Brayton refrigeration cy-
              from house             to house                              cle at 100 kPa, 260 K, and is compressed adiabatically to 300
    p5 = 1 bar 5                                                           kPa. Air enters the turbine at 300 kPa, 300 K, and expands adi-
    T5 = 20°C                        6                                     abatically to 100 kPa. For the cycle
(AV)5 = 0.42 m3/s                          T6 = 50°C
                                                  p2 = 14 bar              (a) determine the net work per unit mass of air flow, in kJ/kg,
                                                  T2 = 75°C                     and the coefficient of performance if the compressor and
                                                                                turbine isentropic efficiencies are both 100%.
3                         Condenser              2
                                                                           (b) plot the net work per unit mass of air flow, in kJ/kg, and
p3 = 14 bar                                                                     the coefficient of performance for equal compressor and
T3 = 28°C                                                                       turbine isentropic efficiencies ranging from 80 to 100%.

                                                               ·        10.31 The Brayton refrigeration cycle of Problem 10.26 is mod-
                                                               Wc          ified by the introduction of a regenerative heat exchanger. In
Expansion                            Compressor                            the modified cycle, compressed air enters the regenerative heat
                                                                           exchanger at 310 K and is cooled to 280 K before entering the
valve                                                                      turbine. Determine, for the modified cycle,

4                                                   1  T1 = ­5°C           (a) the lowest temperature, in K.
p4 = 3.5 bar Evaporator                                p1 = 3.5 bar        (b) the net work input per unit mass of air flow, in kJ/kg.
                                                                           (c) the refrigeration capacity, per unit mass of air flow, in kJ/kg.
                      8                7                                   (d) the coefficient of performance.
              Air exits
              at ­12°C               Outside air                        10.32 Reconsider Problem 10.31, but include in the analysis
                                     enters at 0°C                         that the compressor and turbine have isentropic efficiencies of
 Figure P10.25                                                             85 and 88% respectively. Answer the same questions as in
                                                                           Problem 10.31.
Design & Open Ended Problems: Exploring Engineering Practice 485

10.33 Plot the quantities calculated in parts (a) through (d) of         pression ratio is 6, and the temperature during the isothermal
   Problem 10.31 versus the compressor pressure ratio ranging            expansion is 100 K. Determine
   from 3 to 7. Repeat for equal compressor and turbine isen-
   tropic efficiencies of 95%, 90%, and 80%.                             (a) the heat transfer during the isothermal expansion, in kJ per
                                                                              kg of air.
10.34 Air at 2 bar, 380 K is extracted from a main jet engine
   compressor for cabin cooling. The extracted air enters a heat         (b) the net work for the cycle, in kJ per kg of air.
   exchanger where it is cooled at constant pressure to 320 K            (c) the coefficient of performance.
   through heat transfer with the ambient. It then expands adia-
   batically to 0.95 bar through a turbine and is discharged into     10.36 Air undergoes an Ericsson refrigeration cycle, which is
   the cabin. The turbine has an isentropic efficiency of 75%. If        the reverse of the Ericsson power cycle introduced in Sec. 9.11.
   the mass flow rate of the air is 1.0 kg/s, determine                  At the beginning of the isothermal compression, the pressure
                                                                         and temperature are 100 kPa and 310 K, respectively. The pres-
   (a) the power developed by the turbine, in kW.                        sure ratio during the isothermal compression is 3. During the
   (b) the rate of heat transfer from the air to the ambient, in kW.     isothermal expansion the temperature is 270 K. Determine

10.35 Air undergoes a Stirling refrigeration cycle, which is the         (a) the heat transfer for the isothermal expansion, per unit
   reverse of the Stirling power cycle introduced in Sec. 9.11. At            mass of air flow, in kJ/kg.
   the beginning of the isothermal compression, the pressure and
   temperature are 100 kPa and 300 K, respectively. The com-             (b) the net work, per unit mass of air flow, in kJ/kg.
                                                                         (c) the coefficient of performance.

Design & Open Ended Problems: Exploring Engineering Practice

10.1D A vapor-compression refrigeration system using Refrig-             Base your strategy on the day­night electric rate structure of
   erant 134a is being designed for a household food freezer. The        your local electric utility company.
   refrigeration system must maintain a temperature of 18C
   within the freezer compartment when the temperature of the         10.5D A heat pump is under consideration for heating and cool-
   room is 32C. Under these conditions, the steady-state heat            ing a 3600-ft2 camp lodge in rural Wisconsin. The lodge is
   transfer rate from the room into the freezer compartment is           used continuously in the summer and on weekends in the
   440 W. Specify operating pressures and temperatures at key            winter. The system must provide adequate heating for winter
   points within the refrigeration system and estimate the refrig-       temperatures as low as 23C, and an associated heating load
   erant mass flow rate and compressor power required.                   of 30 kW. In the summer, the maximum outside temperature
                                                                         is 38C, and the associated cooling load is 44 kW. The local
10.2D Design a bench-top-sized air-to-air vapor-compression              water table is 30 M, and the ground water temperature is 14C.
   refrigeration system to be used in a student laboratory. Include      Compare the initial, operating, and maintenance costs of an
   in your design the capability to utilize either of two expansion      air-source heat pump to a vertical well ground-source heat
   devices: a capillary tube or a thermostatic expansion valve.          pump for this application, and make a recommendation as to
   Provide sketches of the layout of your system, including ap-          which is the best option.
   propriate interconnecting piping. Specify the locations and
   types of sensors to allow students to measure the electrical       10.6D Investigate the economic feasibility of using a waste
   power consumption and refrigeration capacity, as well as per-         heat-recovery heat pump for domestic water heating that
   form energy balances on the evaporator and condenser.                 employs ventilation air being discharged from a dwelling as
                                                                         the source. Assume typical hot water use of a family of four
10.3D Refrigerant 22 is widely used as the working fluid in air          living in a single-family dwelling in your locale. Write a report
   conditioners and industrial chillers. However, its use is likely      of your findings.
   to be phased out in the future due to concerns about ozone de-
   pletion. Investigate which environmentally-acceptable working      10.7D List the major design issues involved in using ammonia
   fluids are under consideration to replace Refrigerant 22 for          as the refrigerant in a system to provide chilled water at 4C
   these uses. Determine the design issues for air conditioners and      for air conditioning a college campus in your locale. Develop
   chillers that would result from changing refrigerants. Write a        a layout of the equipment room and a schematic of the chilled
   report of your findings.                                              water distribution system. Label the diagrams with key tem-
                                                                         peratures and make a list of capacities of each of the major
10.4D An air-conditioning system is under consideration that             pieces of equipment.
   will use a vapor-compression ice maker during the nighttime,
   when electric rates are lowest, to store ice for meeting the day-  10.8D Carbon dioxide (CO2) is an inexpensive, nontoxic, and
   time air-conditioning load. The maximum loads are 100 tons            non-flammable candidate for use as a working fluid in vapor-
   during the day and 50 tons at night. Is it best to size the sys-      compression systems. Investigate the suitability of using CO2
   tem to make enough ice at night to carry the entire daytime           as the working fluid in a heat pump-water heater requiring a
   load or to use a smaller chiller that runs both day and night?        power input ranging from 50 to 100 kW and providing hot
                                                                         water ranging from 50 to 90C. Assume that ground water is
486 Chapter 10 Refrigeration and Heat Pump Systems

   used as the source. Specify the typical operating pressures for  10.10D Determine the current status of magnetic refrigeration
   such applications and estimate the variation in coefficient of      technology for use in the 80 to 300 K range. Does this tech-
   performance for the range of hot water temperature. Prepare a       nology hold promise as an economical alternative to vapor-
   memorandum summarizing your results.                                compression systems? Discuss.

10.9D Common cryogenic refrigeration applications include air       10.11D New Materials may Revive Thermoelectric Cooling
   separation to obtain oxygen and nitrogen, large-scale produc-       (see box Sec. 10.3). Investigate the current state-of-the-art of
   tion of liquid hydrogen, and the liquefaction of natural gas.       nanotechnology in an area of current interest. Write a report
   Describe the equipment used to achieve the low temperatures         including at least three references.
   required in these applications. How do cryogenic systems dif-
   fer from systems used for common refrigeration and air-
   conditioning applications?
Thermodynamic  C
Relations      H
               A
               P
               T

               11 E

               R

E N G I N E E R I N G C O N T E X T As seen in previous chapters, applica-                         chapter objective
tion of thermodynamic principles to engineering systems requires data for specific internal
energy, enthalpy, entropy, and other properties. The objective of the present chapter is to
introduce thermodynamic relations that allow u, h, s, and other thermodynamic properties
of simple compressible systems to be evaluated from data that are more readily measured.
Primary emphasis is on systems involving a single chemical species such as water or a
mixture such as air. An introduction to general property relations for mixtures and
solutions is also included.

   Means are available for determining pressure, temperature, volume, and mass experi-
mentally. In addition, the relationships between the specific heats cv and cp and tempera-
ture at relatively low pressure are accessible experimentally. Values for certain other
thermodynamic properties also can be measured without great difficulty. However, specific
internal energy, enthalpy, and entropy are among those properties that are not easily
obtained experimentally, so we resort to computational procedures to determine values
for these.

11.1 Using Equations of State                                                                     equations of state

An essential ingredient for the calculation of properties such as the specific internal energy,
enthalpy, and entropy of a substance is an accurate representation of the relationship among
pressure, specific volume, and temperature. The p­v­T relationship can be expressed alter-
natively: There are tabular representations, as exemplified by the steam tables. The rela-
tionship also can be expressed graphically, as in the p­v­T surface and compressibility factor
charts. Analytical formulations, called equations of state, constitute a third general way of
expressing the p­v­T relationship. Computer software such as Interactive Thermodynamics:
IT also can be used to retrieve p­v­T data.

    The virial equation and the ideal gas equation are examples of analytical equations of state
introduced in previous sections of the book. Analytical formulations of the p­v­T relation-
ship are particularly convenient for performing the mathematical operations required to
calculate u, h, s, and other thermodynamic properties. The object of the present section is to
expand on the discussion of p­v­T relations for simple compressible substances presented
in Chap. 3 by introducing some commonly used equations of state.

                                                                                                                      487
488 Chapter 11 Thermodynamic Relations

                  11.1.1 Getting Started

                 Recall from Sec. 3.4 that the virial equation of state can be derived from the principles of
                 statistical mechanics to relate the p­v­T behavior of a gas to the forces between mole-
                 cules. In one form, the compressibility factor Z is expanded in inverse powers of specific
                 volume as

virial equation                                     B1T2 C 1T2 D1T2  (11.1)
                                        Z  1  v  v2  v 3  # # #

                 The coefficients B, C, D, etc. are called, respectively, the second, third, fourth, etc. virial co-
                 efficients. Each virial coefficient is a function of temperature alone. In principle, the virial
                 coefficients are calculable if a suitable model for describing the forces of interaction between
                 the molecules of the gas under consideration is known. Future advances in refining the theory
                 of molecular interactions may allow the virial coefficients to be predicted with considerable
                 accuracy from the fundamental properties of the molecules involved. However, at present,
                 just the first two or three coefficients can be calculated and only for gases consisting of rel-
                 atively simple molecules. Equation 11.1 also can be used in an empirical fashion in which
                 the coefficients become parameters whose magnitudes are determined by fitting p­v­T data
                 in particular realms of interest. Only the first few coefficients can be found this way, and the
                 result is a truncated equation valid only for certain states.

                    In the limiting case where the gas molecules are assumed not to interact in any way, the
                 second, third, and higher terms of Eq. 11.1 vanish and the equation reduces to Z  1. Since

                 Z  pvRT, this gives the ideal gas equation of state pv  RT. The ideal gas equation of

                 state provides an acceptable approximation at many states, including but not limited to states
                 where the pressure is low relative to the critical pressure and/or the temperature is high rel-
                 ative to the critical temperature of the substance under consideration. At many other states,
                 however, the ideal gas equation of state provides a poor approximation.

                    Over 100 equations of state have been developed in an attempt to improve on the ideal
                 gas equation of state and yet avoid the complexities inherent in a full virial series. In gen-
                 eral, these equations exhibit little in the way of fundamental physical significance and are
                 mainly empirical in character. Most are developed for gases, but some describe the p­v­T
                 behavior of the liquid phase, at least qualitatively. Every equation of state is restricted to par-
                 ticular states. This realm of applicability is often indicated by giving an interval of pressure,
                 or density, where the equation can be expected to represent the p­v­T behavior faithfully.
                 When it is not stated, the realm of applicability of a given equation can be approximated by
                 expressing the equation in terms of the compressibility factor Z and the reduced properties
                 pR, TR, vR and superimposing the result on a generalized compressibility chart or comparing
                 with tabulated compressibility data obtained from the literature.

                  11.1.2 Two-Constant Equations of State

                 Equations of state can be classified by the number of adjustable constants they include. Let
                 us consider some of the more commonly used equations of state in order of increasing
                 complexity, beginning with two-constant equations of state.

                 VAN DER WAALS EQUATION

                 An improvement over the ideal gas equation of state based on elementary molecular arguments
                 was suggested in 1873 by van der Waals, who noted that gas molecules actually occupy more
                 than the negligibly small volume presumed by the ideal gas model and also exert long-range
                 attractive forces on one another. Thus, not all of the volume of a container would be avail-
                 able to the gas molecules, and the force they exert on the container wall would be reduced
                                                                                                                      11.1 Using Equations of State 489

because of the attractive forces that exist between molecules. Based on these elementary
molecular arguments, the van der Waals equation of state is

                             p        RT          a                       (11.2) van der Waals equation
                                     vb           v2

The constant b is intended to account for the finite volume occupied by the molecules, the        p

term av2 accounts for the forces of attraction between molecules, and R is the universal gas                 T > Tc

constant. Note than when a and b are set to zero, the ideal gas equation of state results.           T = Tc
   The van der Waals equation gives pressure as a function of temperature and specific vol-
                                                                                                     T < Tc  (­­_p­
ume and thus is explicit in pressure. Since the equation can be solved for temperature as a                   v
function of pressure and specific volume, it is also explicit in temperature. However, the                           (T  =  0
equation is cubic in specific volume, so it cannot generally be solved for specific volume
in terms of temperature and pressure. The van der Waals equation is not explicit in specific                 Critical
volume.                                                                                                       point

EVALUATING a AND b. The van der Waals equation is a two-constant equation of state.
For a specified substance, values for the constants a and b can be found by fitting the equa-
tion to p­v­T data. With this approach several sets of constants might be required to cover
all states of interest. Alternatively, a single set of constants for the van der Waals equation
can be determined by noting that the critical isotherm passes through a point of inflection at
the critical point, and the slope is zero there. Expressed mathematically, these conditions are,
respectively

a  02p      b                    0p
                      0,     a b 0                      1critical point2  (11.3)
      v  2    T               0v T                                                                                                                       v

   0

Although less overall accuracy normally results when the constants a and b are determined
using critical point behavior than when they are determined by fitting p­v­T data in a par-
ticular region of interest, the advantage of this approach is that the van der Waals constants
can be expressed in terms of the critical pressure pc and critical temperature Tc, as demon-
strated next.

   For the van der Waals equation at the critical point

                             pc       RTc            a
                                     vc  b
                                                  v  2
                                                     c

Applying Eqs. 11.3 with the van der Waals equation gives

            a    02p    b          2RTc              6a       0
                                 1vc  b23
                 0v  2    T                          v  4
                                                        c

             0p                         RTc             2a       0
            ab                       1vc  b22
                                                        v  3
             0v T                                          c

Solving the foregoing three equations for a, b, and vc in terms of the critical pressure and
critical temperature

                                 a     27  R  2T  2                       (11.4a)
                                                  c                       (11.4b)
                                                                          (11.4c)
                                       64 pc

                                 b  RTc
                                       8pc

                                 vc    3  R Tc
                                       8   pc
490 Chapter 11 Thermodynamic Relations

                                Values of the van der Waals constants a and b determined from Eqs. 11.4a and 11.4b for
                                several common substances are given in Table A-24 for pressure in bar, specific volume in
                                m3/kmol, and temperature in K.

                        GENERALIZED FORM. Introducing the compressibility factor Z  pvRT, the reduced tem-
                        perature TR  TTc, the pseudoreduced specific volume vRż  pcvRTc, and the foregoing

                        expressions for a and b, the van der Waals equation can be written in terms of Z, vR, and

                        TR as

                                    Z      vRż  vRż                                2764                  (11.5)

                                                 18                                TRvRż

                        or alternatively in terms of Z, TR, and pR as

                        Z3    a pR     1b  Z2                          a  27pR     b  Z    27pR2      0  (11.6)
                               8TR
                                                                          64T   2          512T  3
                                                                                R                R

                        The details of these developments are left as exercises. Equation 11.5 can be evaluated for
                        specified values of vR and TR and the resultant Z values located on a generalized compress-
                        ibility chart to show approximately where the equation performs satisfactorily. A similar ap-
                        proach can be taken with Eq. 11.6.

                           The compressibility factor at the critical point yielded by the van der Waals equation is
                        determined from Eq. 11.4c as

                                       Zc       pcvc                        0.375
                                                R Tc

                        Actually, Zc varies from about 0.23 to 0.33 for most substances (see Tables A-1). Accord-
                        ingly, with the set of constants given by Eqs. 11.4, the van der Waals equation is inaccurate
                        in the vicinity of the critical point. Further study would show inaccuracy in other regions as
                        well, so this equation is not suitable for many thermodynamic evaluations. The van der Waals
                        equation is of interest to us primarily because it is the simplest model that accounts for the
                        departure of actual gas behavior from the ideal gas equation of state.

                        REDLICH­KWONG EQUATION

                        Three other two-constant equations of state that have been widely used are the Berthelot, Di-
                        eterici, and Redlich­Kwong equations. The Redlich­Kwong equation, considered by many
                        to be the best of the two-constant equations of state, is

Redlich­Kwong equation        p         RT                                v 1v   a                       (11.7)
                                       vb                                        b2T12

                        This equation, proposed in 1949, is mainly empirical in nature, with no rigorous justification
                        in terms of molecular arguments. The Redlich­Kwong equation is explicit in pressure but not
                        in specific volume or temperature. Like the van der Waals equation, the Redlich­Kwong equa-
                        tion is cubic in specific volume.

                           Although the Redlich­Kwong equation is somewhat more difficult to manipulate math-
                        ematically than the van der Waals equation, it is more accurate, particularly at higher pres-
                        sures. In recent years, several modified forms of this equation have been proposed to
                        achieve improved accuracy. The two-constant Redlich­Kwong equation performs better
                                                                                                                      11.1 Using Equations of State 491

than some equations of state having several adjustable constants; still, two-constant equa-
tions of state tend to be limited in accuracy as pressure (or density) increases. Increased
accuracy at such states normally requires equations with a greater number of adjustable
constants.

EVALUATING a AND b. As for the van der Waals equation, the constants a and b in Eq. 11.7
can be determined for a specified substance by fitting the equation to p­v­T data, with sev-
eral sets of constants required to represent accurately all states of interest. Alternatively, a
single set of constants in terms of the critical pressure and critical temperature can be eval-
uated using Eqs. 11.3, as for the van der Waals equation. The result is

a    aż  R  2T   52       and       b  bż R Tc        (11.8)

                 c

            pc                                    pc

where a  0.42748 and b  0.08664. Evaluation of these constants is left as an exercise.
Values of the Redlich­Kwong constants a and b determined from Eqs. 11.8 for several com-
mon substances are given in Table A-24 for pressure in bar, specific volume in m3/kmol, and

temperature in K.

GENERALIZED FORM. Introducing the compressibility factor Z, the reduced temperature
TR, the pseudoreduced specific volume vR, and the foregoing expressions for a and b, the
Redlich­Kwong equation can be written as

   Z             vRż              aż                  (11.9)
                 
            vRż       bż    1vRż    bż2  T  3  2

                                            R

Equation 11.9 can be evaluated at specified values of vR and TR and the resultant Z values
located on a generalized compressibility chart to show the regions where the equation per-
forms satisfactorily. With the constants given by Eqs. 11.8, the compressibility factor at the
critical point yielded by the Redlich­Kwong equation is Zc  0.333, which is at the high end
of the range of values for most substances, indicating that inaccuracy in the vicinity of the
critical point should be expected.

   In Example 11.1, the pressure of a gas is determined using three equations of state and
the generalized compressibility chart. The results are compared.

E X A M P L E 1 1 . 1 Comparing Equations of State

A cylindrical tank containing 4.0 kg of carbon monoxide gas at 50C has an inner diameter of 0.2 m and a length of
1 m. Determine the pressure, in bar, exerted by the gas using (a) the generalized compressibility chart, (b) the ideal gas
equation of state, (c) the van der Waals equation of state, (d) the Redlich­Kwong equation of state. Compare the results
obtained.

SOLUTION
Known: A cylindrical take of known dimensions contains 4.0 kg of CO gas at 50C.
Find: Determine the pressure exerted by the gas using four alternative methods.
492 Chapter 11 Thermodynamic Relations
    Schematic and Given Data:
                   D = 0.2 m

L=1m  4 kg CO gas                      Assumptions:
        at ­50°C
                                       1. As shown in the accompanying figure, the closed system is taken as the gas.
                                       2. The system is at equilibrium.

                                        Figure E11.1

Analysis: The molar specific volume of the gas is required in each part of the solution. Let us begin by evaluating it. The
volume occupied by the gas is

                                       V  a pD2 b L  p10.2 m2211.0 m2  0.0314 m3
                                            4         4

The molar specific volume is then

                            v  Mv  M a V b  a28 kg b a 0.0314 m3 b  0.2198 m3
                                              m       kmol 4.0 kg                             kmol

(a) From Table A-1 for CO, Tc  133 K, pc  35 bar. Thus, the reduced temperature TR and pseudoreduced specific volume
vRż are, respectively

                                      223 K
                               TR  133 K  1.68

                               vRż     vpc    10.2198 m3/kmol2 135     105 N/m22              0.696
                                       RTc      18314 N # m / kmol #  K2 1133 K2

Turning to Fig. A-2, Z  0.9. Solving Z  pvRT for pressure and inserting known values

                            p  ZRT     0.918314 N # m / kmol # K2 1223 K2    `    1  bar   `   75.9 bar
                                v                                               105  N/m2
                                               10.2198 m3/kmol2

(b) The ideal gas equation of state gives

                            p      RT      18314 N # m/ kmol # K21223 K2  `    1  bar   `   84.4 bar
                                   v              10.2198 m3/kmol2           105  N/m2

(c) For carbon monoxide, the van der Waals constants a and b given by Eqs. 11.4 can be read directly from Table A-24. Thus

                                                        m3 2                              m3
                                   a  1.474 bar a b and                   b  0.0395

                                                      kmol                              kmol

Substituting into Eq. 11.2

                                   RT a
                            p  v  b  v2

                            18314 N # m / kmol # K2 1223 K2 1 bar                 1.474 bar 1m3/kmol22
                             10.2198  0.03952 1m3/kmol2 ` 105 N/m2 `  10.2198 m3/kmol22

                             72.3 bar
                                                                                                    11.1 Using Equations of State 493

Alternatively, the values for vRż and TR obtained in the solution of part (a) can be substituted into Eq. 11.5, giving Z  0.86.

Then, with p  ZRTv, p  72.5 bar. The slight difference is attributed to roundoff.

(d) For carbon monoxide, the Redlich­Kwong constants given by Eqs. 11.8 can be read directly from Table A-24. Thus

                                  a      17.22 bar 1m62 1K212      and b  0.02737 m3/kmol

                                               1kmol22

Substituting into Eq. 11.7

           p                   RT        v 1v   a
                              vb                b2T12

                              18314 N # m/kmol # K2 1223 K2    `    1  bar     `                17.22 bar
                              10.2198  0.027372 m3/kmol           105  N/m2           10.21982 10.247172 1223212

                             75.1 bar

Alternatively, the values for vRż and TR obtained in the solution of part (a) can be substituted into Eq. 11.9, giving Z  0.89.

Then, with p  ZRTv, p  75.1 bar.

In comparison to the value of part (a), the ideal gas equation of state predicts a pressure that is 11% higher and the van der
Waals equation gives a value that is 5% lower. The Redlich­Kwong value is about 1% less than the value obtained using the
compressibility chart.

 11.1.3 Multiconstant Equations of State

To fit the p­v­T data of gases over a wide range of states, Beattie and Bridgeman
proposed in 1928 a pressure-explicit equation involving five constants in addition to the
gas constant. The Beattie­Bridgeman equation can be expressed in a truncated virial
form as

                                  p      RT      b      g      d                                                Beattie­Bridgeman
                                          v      v2     v3     v4                                   (11.10) equation

where

                              b  BRT  A  cRT 2                                                      (11.11)
                              g  BbRT  Aa  BcRT 2
                              d  BbcRT 2

The five constants a, b, c, A, and B appearing in these equations are determined by curve fit-
ting to experimental data.

   Benedict, Webb, and Rubin extended the Beattie­Bridgeman equation of state to cover a
broader range of states. The resulting equation, involving eight constants in addition to the
gas constant, has been particularly successful in predicting the p­v­T behavior of light
hydrocarbons. The Benedict­Webb­Rubin equation is

p      RT   aBRT  A           C   b  1     1bRT  a2         aa           c        a1    g   b  exp  avg2 b        Benedict­Webb­Rubin
        v                     T2     v2         v3          v6         v 3T 2           v2                        equation

                                                                                                    (11.12)
494 Chapter 11 Thermodynamic Relations

                                Values of the constants appearing in Eq. 11.12 for five common substances are given in
                                Table A-24 for pressure in bar, specific volume in m3/kmol, and temperature in K. Because
                                Eq. 11.12 has been so successful, its realm of applicability has been extended by introduc-
                                ing additional constants.

                                    Equations 11.10 and 11.12 are merely representative of multiconstant equations of state.
                                Many other multiconstant equations have been proposed. With high-speed computers, equa-
                                tions having 50 or more constants have been developed for representing the p­v­T behavior
                                of different substances.

exact differential  11.2 Important Mathematical Relations
test for exactness
                    Values of two independent intensive properties are sufficient to fix the state of a simple com-
                    pressible system of specified mass and composition (Sec. 3.1). All other intensive properties
                    can be determined as functions of the two independent properties: p  p(T, v), u  u(T, v),
                    h  h(T, v), and so on. These are all functions of two independent variables of the form
                    z  z(x, y), with x and y being the independent variables. It might also be recalled that the
                    differential of every property is exact (Sec. 2.2.1). The differentials of nonproperties such as
                    work and heat are inexact. Let us review briefly some concepts from calculus about functions
                    of two independent variables and their differentials.

                        The exact differential of a function z, continuous in the variables x and y, is

                                                            0z        0z
                        dz  a b dx  a b dy                                (11.13a)
                                                            0x y  0y x

                    This can be expressed alternatively as

                        dz  M dx  N dy                                    (11.13b)

                    where M  (0z0x)y and N  (0z0y)x. The coefficient M is the partial derivative of z with
                    respect to x (the variable y being held constant). Similarly, N is the partial derivative of z
                    with respect to y (the variable x being held constant).

                       If the coefficients M and N have continuous first partial derivatives, the order in which a
                    second partial derivative of the function z is taken is immaterial. That is

                        0 0z                                      0 0z
                        ca b d  ca b d                                    (11.14a)
                        0y 0x y x 0x 0y x y

                    or

                                                            0M    0N
                        a b a b                                           (11.14b)
                                                            0y x 0x y

                    which can be called the test for exactness, as discussed next.
                       In words, Eqs. 11.14 indicate that the mixed second partial derivatives of the function z

                    are equal. The relationship in Eq. 11.14 is both a necessary and sufficient condition for the
                    exactness of a differential expression, and it may therefore be used as a test for exactness.
                    When an expression such as M dx  N dy does not meet this test, no function z exists whose
                    differential is equal to this expression. In thermodynamics, Eq. 11.14 is not generally used
                    to test exactness but rather to develop additional property relations. This is illustrated in
                    Sec. 11.3 to follow.
                                                                                                         11.2 Important Mathematical Relations 495

   Two other relations among partial derivatives are listed next for which applications are
found in subsequent sections of this chapter. These are

                   0x 0y                                               (11.15)
                  a b a b 1

                   0y z 0x z

and

            0y        a 0zb  a 0xb   1                                 (11.16)
           ab
               0z x 0x y 0y z

    for example. . . consider the three quantities x, y, and z, any two of which may
be selected as the independent variables. Thus, we can write x  x(y, z) and y  y(x, z). The
differentials of these functions are, respectively

     0x    0x                                          0y        0y
     dx  a b dy  a b dz and dy  a b dx  a b dz
     0y z  0z y                                        0x z      0z x

Eliminating dy between these two equations results in

           0x 0y             0x 0y                           0x
     c 1  a b a b d dx  c a b a b  a b d dz                            (11.17)
           0y z 0x z         0y z 0z x 0z y

Since x and z can be varied independently, let us hold z constant and vary x. That is, let
dz  0 and dx 0. It then follows from Eq. 11.17 that the coefficient of dx must vanish, so
Eq. 11.15 must be satisfied. Similarly, when dx  0 and dz 0, the coefficient of dz in
Eq. 11.17 must vanish. Introducing Eq. 11.15 into the resulting expression and rearranging
gives Eq. 11.16. The details are left as an exercise. 

APPLICATION. An equation of state p  p(T, v) provides a specific example of a function
of two independent variables. The partial derivatives (0p0T )v and (0p0v)T of p(T, v) are im-
portant for subsequent discussions. The quantity (0p0T )v is the partial derivative of p with
respect to T (the variable v being held constant). This partial derivative represents the slope

at a point on a line of constant specific volume (isometric) projected onto the p­T plane.
Similarly, the partial derivative (0p0v)T is the partial derivative of p with respect to v (the
variable T being held constant). This partial derivative represents the slope at a point on
a line of constant temperature (isotherm) projected on the p­v plane. The partial derivatives
(0p0T )v and (0p0v)T are themselves intensive properties because they have unique values
at each state.

   The p­v­T surfaces given in Figs. 3.1 and 3.2 are graphical representations of func-
tions of the form p  p(v, T ). Figure 11.1 shows the liquid, vapor, and two-phase regions
of a p­v­T surface projected onto the p­v and p­T planes. Referring first to Fig. 11.1a,

note that several isotherms are sketched. In the single-phase regions, the partial deriva-
tive (0p0v)T giving the slope is negative at each state along an isotherm except at the crit-
ical point, where the partial derivative vanishes. Since the isotherms are horizontal in the
two-phase liquid­vapor region, the partial derivative (0p0v)T vanishes there as well. For
these states, pressure is independent of specific volume and is a function of temperature
only: p  psat(T ).

   Figure 11.1b shows the liquid and vapor regions with several isometrics (constant specific

volume lines) superimposed. In the single-phase regions, the isometrics are nearly straight
or are slightly curved and the partial derivative (0p0T )v is positive at each state along the
curves. For the two-phase liquid­vapor states corresponding to a specified value of temper-

ature, the pressure is independent of specific volume and is determined by the temperature
496 Chapter 11 Thermodynamic Relations

          p                                                                 p                        v < vc v = vc

                              T > Tc                                                          (­­p­  v>0
                                                                                               T            (

                T = Tc           (­­vp­ T < 0                                                        Isometric   ((­­p­
             T < Tc           (­­vp­ T = 0                                                           (             T
                         (                                                                                               v>0
                                   (
                                      (                                                   Critical                         v > vc
                                                                                           point                  Isometric

             (­­vp­ T < 0       Critical              Isotherm                        Liquid                                Vapor
                                 point              Isotherm
                                                                                                                (­d­p­
                              (p/v)T = 0                                                                         dT sat

                              Liquid-vapor

                                                                                  Triple      Locus of saturation states
                                                                                  point
                                                                                                                                 T
                                                                   v                                  (b)
                                        (a)

           Figure 11.1 Diagrams used to discuss (0p0v)T and (0p0T )v. (a) p­v diagram.
          (b) Phase diagram.

          only. Hence, the slopes of the isometrics passing through the two-phase states corresponding

          to a specified temperature are all equal, being given by the slope of the saturation curve at
          that temperature, denoted simply as (dpdT )sat. For these two-phase states, (0p0T )v 
          (dpdT )sat.

             In this section, important aspects of functions of two variables have been introduced.

          The following example illustrates some of these ideas using the van der Waals equation

          of state.

E X A M P L E 1 1 . 2 Applying Mathematical Relations

For the van der Waals equation of state, (a) determine an expression for the exact differential dp, (b) show that the mixed sec-
ond partial derivatives of the result obtained in part (a) are equal, and (c) develop an expression for the partial derivative
(0v0T )p.

SOLUTION

Known: The equation of state is the van der Waals equation.

Find: Determine the differential dp, show that the mixed second partial derivatives of dp are equal, and develop an expres-
sion for (0v0T )p.

Analysis:

(a) By definition, the differential of a function p  p(T, v) is

                                                    0p                0p
                                          dp  a b dT  a b dv
                                                    0T v              0v T

The partial derivatives appearing in this expression obtained from the van der Waals equation expressed as p 
RT(v  b)  av2 are

                              0p             R                  0p                RT          2a
                         M    ab                 ,      N       ab          
                               0T v       v     b                0v T         1v    b22       v3
                                                                                                                     11.3 Developing Property Relations 497

  Accordingly, the differential takes the form

                                dp                 av       R   b dT          c    RT                        2a  d   dv
                                                               b                 1v  b22                     v3

  (b) Calculating the mixed second partial derivatives

                                                a  0M           0 0p                                         R
                                                       b            ca b d                       
                                                   0v           0v     0T v T                      1v           b22
                                                         T

                                                a 0Nb           0      0p                                 R     b22
                                                  0T v          0T  ca b d                         1v     

                                                                       0v T v

  Thus, the mixed second partial derivatives are equal, as expected.

  (c) An expression for (0v0T )p can be derived using Eqs. 11.15 and 11.16. Thus, with x  p, y  v, and z  T, Eq. 11.16
  gives

                                                                0v 0p 0T
                                                              a b a b a b  1

                                                                0T p 0v T 0p v
  or

                                                       a  0v            1  0  p  0  v  2  1   0  T  0  p  2
                                                             b                            T1
                                                                                                             v
                                                          0T p

  Then, with x  T, y  p, and z  v, Eq. 11.15 gives

                                                                0T                     1
                                                               ab
                                                                 0p v         10p0T 2v

  Combining these results

                                                            a  0v  b             10p0T 2v
                                                               0T                1 0p 0v2T
                                                                     p

  The numerator and denominator of this expression have been evaluated in part (a), so

                                                   0v                         R1v  b2
                                                a     b        
                                                   0T p          3 RT 1 v                 b22          2av3 4

  which is the desired result.

   Since the van der Waals equation is cubic in specific volume, it can be solved for v (T, p) at only certain states. Part (c)

      shows how the partial derivative (0v0T )p can be evaluated at states where it exists.

11.3 Developing Property Relations

In this section, several important property relations are developed, including the expressions
known as the Maxwell relations. The concept of a fundamental thermodynamic function is
also introduced. These results, which are important for subsequent discussions, are obtained
for simple compressible systems of fixed chemical composition using the concept of an exact
differential.

 11.3.1 Principal Exact Differentials

The principal results of this section are obtained using Eqs. 11.18, 11.19, 11.22, and 11.23.
The first two of these equations are derived in Sec. 6.3.1, where they are referred to as the
498 Chapter 11 Thermodynamic Relations

                                T ds equations. For present purposes, it is convenient to express them as

                    du  T ds  p dv                                                                         (11.18)
                    dh  T ds  v dp                                                                         (11.19)

Helmholtz function     The other two equations used to obtain the results of this section involve, respectively, the
Gibbs function      specific Helmholtz function  defined by

                                                            c  u  Ts                                       (11.20)

                    and the specific Gibbs function g defined by

                                                            g  h  Ts                                       (11.21)

                    The Helmholtz and Gibbs functions are properties because each is defined in terms of
                    properties. From inspection of Eqs. 11.20 and 11.21, the units of  and g are the same
                    as those of u and h. These two new properties are introduced solely because they con-
                    tribute to the present discussion, and no physical significance need be attached to them
                    at this point.

                       Forming the differential d

                    dc  du  d1Ts2  du  T ds  s dT

                    Substituting Eq. 11.18 into this gives

                    dc  p dv  s dT                                                                         (11.22)

                       Similarly, forming the differential dg                                              (11.23)
                                                    dg  dh  d1Ts2  dh  T ds  s dT

                    Substituting Eq. 11.19 into this gives

                                                                 dg  v dp  s dT

                     11.3.2 Property Relations from Exact Differentials

                    The four differential equations introduced above, Eqs. 11.18, 11.19, 11.22, and 11.23, pro-

                    vide the basis for several important property relations. Since only properties are involved,
                    each is an exact differential exhibiting the general form dz  M dx  N dy considered in
                    Sec. 11.2. Underlying these exact differentials are, respectively, functions of the form
                    u(s, v), h(s, p), (v, T), and g(T, p). Let us consider these functions in the order given.

                       The differential of the function u  u(s, v) is

                                                            0u        0u
                    du  a b ds  a b dv
                                                            0s v      0v s

                    By comparison with Eq. 11.18, we conclude that

                                                              T  a 0ub                                     (11.24)
                                                                      0s v                                 (11.25)
                                                                      0u

                                                            p  a b
                                                                      0v s
                                                                              11.3 Developing Property Relations 499

The differential of the function h  h(s, p) is

0h                                              0h
dh  a b ds  a b dp
0s p                                            0p s

By comparison with Eq. 11.19, we conclude that

T  a 0hb                                                                            (11.26)
        0s p                                                                        (11.27)
        0h

va b
        0p s

Similarly, the coefficients p and s of Eq. 11.22 are partial derivatives of (v, T)

                                                          0c                        (11.28)
                                                p  a b                              (11.29)

                                                          0v T
                                                s  a 0cb

                                                          0T v

and the coefficients v and s of Eq. 11.23 are partial derivatives of g(T, p)

         0g                                                                         (11.30)
  va b                                                                              (11.31)

         0p T
          0g
s  a b
         0T p

   As each of the four differentials introduced above is exact, the second mixed partial de-
rivatives are equal. Thus, in Eq. 11.18, T plays the role of M in Eq. 11.14b and p plays the
role of N in Eq. 11.14b, so

a 0Tb         0p                                                                    (11.32)
0v s    a b
                                                0s v

In Eq. 11.19, T and v play the roles of M and N in Eq. 11.14b, respectively. Thus

                                           a 0Tb  a 0vb                             (11.33)
                                             0p s 0s p

Similarly, from Eqs. 11.22 and 11.23 follow

0p     0s
a b a b                                                                             (11.34)
0T v 0v T                                                                           (11.35)

a 0v b  a 0s b
0T p                                            0p T

Equations 11.32 through 11.35 are known as the Maxwell relations.                             Maxwell relations
500 Chapter 11 Thermodynamic Relations

TABLE 11.1 Summary of Property Relations from Exact Differentials

Basic relations:                                                 from h  h(s, p)
from u  u(s, v)

                     T  a0ub                           (11.24)                        T  a 0hb      (11.26)
                             0s v                                                             0s p  (11.27)
                                                       (11.25)                                      (11.30)
                   p  a 0u b                                      from g  g(T, p)     v  a 0hb      (11.31)
                             0v s                                                            0p s
                                                                                                    (11.34)
from   (v, T)                                                                                       (11.35)

                             0c                        (11.28)                              0g      (11.36)
                   p  a b                              (11.29)                       va b

                             0v T                                                           0p T
                             0c                                                              0g
                   s  a b                                                          s  a b
                             0T v                                                           0T p
Maxwell relations:

a 0Tb                                          0p      (11.32)         0p                a 0s b
0v s                                     a b           (11.33)       ab
                                        0s v                                      0T v 0v T

a 0Tb                                        0v                        0v                a 0s b
                                        a b                          ab
0p s 0s p                                                                         0T p  0p T

Additional relations:

a 0ub  a 0hb                                                         a 0ub  a 0cb
  0s v 0s p                                                           0v s 0v T

a 0hb                                        0g                                   0c    0g
                                        a b                          a b a b
0p s 0p T                                                                          0T v 0T p

   Since each of the properties T, p, v, s appears on the left side of two of the eight equa-
tions, Eqs. 11.24 through 11.31, four additional property relations can be obtained by equat-
ing such expressions. They are

                                                 a 0ub  a 0hb ,  a 0ub  a 0cb                       (11.36)
                                                   0s v 0s p      0v s 0v T

                                                   0h  0g        0c  0g
                                                 a b a b,        a b a b
                                                   0p s 0p T     0T v 0T p

   Equations 11.24 through 11.36, which are listed in Table 11.1 for ease of reference, are
16 property relations obtained from Eqs. 11.18, 11.19, 11.22, and 11.23, using the concept
of an exact differential. Since Eqs. 11.19, 11.22, and 11.23 can themselves be derived from
Eq. 11.18, the important role of the first T dS equation in developing property relations is
apparent.

   The utility of these 16 property relations is demonstrated in subsequent sections of this
chapter. However, to give a specific illustration at this point, suppose the partial deriva-
tive (0s0v)T involving entropy is required for a certain purpose. The Maxwell relation
Eq. 11.34 would allow the derivative to be determined by evaluating the partial derivative
(0p0T)v, which can be obtained using p­v­T data only. Further elaboration is provided
in Example 11.3.
                                                                                           11.3 Developing Property Relations 501

E X A M P L E 1 1 . 3 Applying the Maxwell Relations

Evaluate the partial derivative (0s0v)T for water vapor at a state fixed by a temperature of 240C and a specific volume of
0.4646 m3/kg. (a) Use the Redlich­Kwong equation of state and an appropriate Maxwell relation. (b) Check the value obtained
using steam table data.

SOLUTION
Known: The system consists of a fixed amount of water vapor at 240C and 0.4646 m3/kg.

Find: Determine the partial derivative (0s0v)T employing the Redlich­Kwong equation of state, together with a Maxwell
relation. Check the value obtained using steam table data.

Assumptions:

1. The system consists of a fixed amount of water at a known equilibrium state.

2. Accurate values for (0s0T )v in the neighborhood of the given state can be determined from the Redlich­Kwong equation
of state.

Analysis:
(a) The Maxwell relation given by Eq. 11.34 allows (0s0v)T to be determined from the p­v­T relationship. That is

                                                          a 0s b           0p
                                                                      a b
                                                             0v T 0T v

The partial derivative (0p0T )v obtained from the Redlich­Kwong equation, Eq. 11.7, is

                                                0p           v  R  b    2v 1v   a  b2T 32
                                              ab                               

                                               0T v

At the specified state, the temperature is 513 K and the specific volume on a molar basis is

                                       v      0.4646   m3        18.02  kg      8.372      m3
                                                                a          b
                                                       kg kmol                          kmol

From Table A-24

                                a  142.59 bar a           m3      2             b  0.0211 m3
                                                                                              kmol
                                                       kmol     b 1K21 2,

Substituting values into the expression for (0p0T )v

                       a8314     N#m          b                       142.59 bar a  m3    2
                                kmol # K
                0p                                                                      b 1K21 2            ` 105 N/m2 `
              ab                                                                   kmol                        1 bar
                       18.372  0.02112 m3                             m2    b a8.3931 m3
               0T v                                    2 a 8.372
                                                                                               b 1513 K232
                                              kmol                    kmol              kmol

                       a1004.3  N#  m   b  `     1 kJ  m  `
                                m3  #K        103 N #

                       1.0043    kJ
                               m3 # K

Accordingly

                                                    a  0s          1.0043    kJ
                                                          b                m3 # K

                                                       0v T
502 Chapter 11 Thermodynamic Relations

    (b) A value for (0s0v)T can be estimated using a graphical approach with steam table data, as follows: At 240C, Table A-4
    provides the values for specific entropy s and specific volume v tabulated below

                                                               p (bar)           T  240C          (m3/kg)

                                                                  1.0            s (kJ/ kg # K)   2.359
                                                                  1.5                             1.570
                                                                  3.0               7.9949        0.781
                                                                  5.0               7.8052        0.4646
                                                                  7.0               7.4774        0.3292
                                                                10.0                7.2307        0.2275
                                                                                    7.0641
                                                                                    6.8817

With the values for s and v listed in the table, the plot in Fig. E11.3a giving s versus v can be prepared. Note that a line repre-

senting the tangent to the curve at the given state is shown on the plot. The pressure at this state is 5 bar. The slope of the tan-
gent is (0s0v)T  1.0 kJ/m3 # K. Thus, the value of (0s0v)T obtained using the Redlich­Kwong equation agrees closely with
the result determined graphically using steam table data.

                                T = 240°C                               1.5 bar

Specific entropy, kJ/kg·K  7.5
                                                        3 bar

                                5 bar

                                7 bar

                           7.0  0.5                            1.0      1.5

                                       Specific volume, m3/kg

                                                                                  Figure E11.3a

Alternative Solution:
Alternatively, the partial derivative (0s0v)T can be estimated using numerical methods and computer-generated data. The
following IT code illustrates one way the partial derivative, denoted dsdv, can be estimated:

    v = 0.4646 // m3/kg
    T = 240 // C
    v2 = v + dv
    v1 = v ­ dv
    dv = 0.2
    v2 = v_PT("Water/Steam", p2, T)
    v1 = v_PT("Water/Steam", p1, T)
    s2 = s_PT("Water/Steam", p2, T)
    s1 = s_PT("Water/Steam", p1, T)
    dsdv = (s2 ­ s1) / (v2 ­ v1)
                                                                                            11.3 Developing Property Relations 503

  Using the Explore button, sweep dv from 0.0001 to 0.2 in steps of 0.001. Then, using the Graph button, the following graph
  can be constructed:

        1.12

        1.10
                                       T = 240°C

        1.08

  dsdv  1.06

        1.04

        1.02

        1.00
        0.00  0.05  0.10                          0.15        0.20

                    dv
                                                                  Figure E11.3b

  From the computer data, the y-intercept of the graph is

                                                  0s              ˘s              kJ
                                                  ab       lim a      b    1.033
                                                   0v T           ˘v T            m3  #  K
                                                           ˘vS0

  This answer is an estimate because it relies on a numerical approximation of the partial derivative based on the equation of
  state that underlies the steam tables. The values obtained using the Redlich­Kwong equation of state and the graphical method
  agree with this result.

   It is left as an exercise to show that, in accordance with Eq. 11.34, the value of (0p0T )v estimated by a procedure like the

      one used for (0s0v)T would agree with the value obtained here.

 11.3.3 Fundamental Thermodynamic Functions

A fundamental thermodynamic function provides a complete description of the thermody-
namic state. In the case of a pure substance with two independent properties, the fundamental
thermodynamic function can take one of the following four forms:

                                                  u  u1s, v2                                (11.37) fundamental function
                                                  h  h1s, p2
                                                  c  c1T, v2
                                                  g  g1T, p2

Of the four fundamental functions listed in Eqs. 11.37, the Helmholtz function  and the
Gibbs function g have the greatest importance for subsequent discussions (see Sec. 11.6.2).
Accordingly, let us discuss the fundamental function concept with reference to  and g.

   In principle, all properties of interest can be determined from a fundamental thermody-
namic function by differentiation and combination.  for example. . . consider a fun-
damental function of the form (T, v). The properties v and T, being the independent
504 Chapter 11 Thermodynamic Relations

variables, are specified to fix the state. The pressure p at this state can be determined from
Eq. 11.28 by differentiation of (T, v). Similarly, the specific entropy s at the state can be
found from Eq. 11.29 by differentiation. By definition,   u  Ts, so the specific internal
energy is obtained as

                                                u  c  Ts

With u, p, and v known, the specific enthalpy can be found from the definition h  u  pv.
Similarly, the specific Gibbs function is found from the definition, g  h  Ts. The specific
heat cv can be determined by further differentiation, cv  (0u0T )v. Other properties can be
calculated with similar operations. 

    for example. . . consider a fundamental function of the form g(T, p). The proper-
ties T and p are specified to fix the state. The specific volume and specific entropy at this
state can be determined by differentiation from Eqs. 11.30 and 11.31, respectively. By defi-
nition, g  h  Ts, so the specific enthalpy is obtained as

                                                 h  g  Ts

With h, p, and v known, the specific internal energy can be found from u  h  pv. The
specific heat cp can be determined by further differentiation, cp  (0h0T )p. Other proper-
ties can be calculated with similar operations. 

   Like considerations apply for functions of the form u(s, v) and h(s, p), as can readily be
verified. Note that a Mollier diagram provides a graphical representation of the fundamen-
tal function h(s, p).

11.4 Evaluating Changes in Entropy, Internal
           Energy, and Enthalpy

With the introduction of the Maxwell relations, we are in a position to develop thermody-
namic relations that allow changes in entropy, internal energy, and enthalpy to be evaluated
from measured property data. The presentation begins by considering relations applicable to
phase changes and then turns to relations for use in single-phase regions.

 11.4.1 Considering Phase Change

The object of this section is to develop relations for evaluating the changes in specific en-
tropy, internal energy, and enthalpy accompanying a change of phase at fixed temperature
and pressure. A principal role is played by the Clapeyron equation, which allows the change
in enthalpy during vaporization, sublimation, or melting at a constant temperature to be eval-
uated from pressure-specific volume­temperature data pertaining to the phase change. Thus,
the present discussion provides important examples of how p­v­T measurements can lead to
the determination of other property changes, namely s, u, and h for a change of phase.

   Consider a change in phase from saturated liquid to saturated vapor at fixed temperature.
For an isothermal phase change, pressure also remains constant, so Eq. 11.19 reduces to

                                                  dh  T ds

Integration of this expression gives

                                        sg    sf    hg     hf  (11.38)
                                                        T
                                                                    11.4 Evaluating Changes in Entropy, Internal Energy, and Enthalpy 505

Hence, the change in specific entropy accompanying a phase change from saturated liquid
to saturated vapor at temperature T can be determined from the temperature and the change
in specific enthalpy.

   The change in specific internal energy during the phase change can be determined using
the definition h  u  pv.

ug  uf  hg  hf  p 1vg  vf2                                                    (11.39)

Thus, the change in specific internal energy accompanying a phase change at temperature T
can be determined from the temperature and the changes in specific volume and enthalpy.

CLAPEYRON EQUATION. The change in specific enthalpy required by Eqs. 11.38 and 11.39
can be obtained using the Clapeyron equation. To derive the Clapeyron equation, begin with
the Maxwell relation

          0s         0p
      a b a b                                                                 (11.34)
          0v T 0T v

During a phase change at fixed temperature, the pressure is independent of specific volume
and is determined by temperature alone. Thus, the quantity (0p0T )v is determined by the
temperature and can be represented as

      0p             dp
      a b a b
      0T v           dT sat

where "sat" indicates that the derivative is the slope of the saturation pressure­temperature
curve at the point determined by the temperature held constant during the phase change
(Sec. 11.2). Combining the last two equations gives

      a 0s b          dp
      0v T       a b
                     dT sat

   Since the right side of this equation is fixed when the temperature is specified, the equa-
tion can be integrated to give

sg    sf      a  dp  b 1vg    vf2

                 dT    sat

Introducing Eq. 11.38 into this expression results in the Clapeyron equation

     dp              hg  hf                                                   (11.40) Clapeyron equation
    ab
    dT sat T 1vg  vf2

Equation 11.40 allows (hg  hf) to be evaluated using only p­v­T data pertaining to the phase
change. In instances when the enthalpy change is also measured, the Clapeyron equation can
be used to check the consistency of the data. Once the specific enthalpy change is deter-
mined, the corresponding changes in specific entropy and specific internal energy can be
found from Eqs. 11.38 and 11.39, respectively.

   Equations 11.38, 11.39, and 11.40 also can be written for sublimation or melting occur-
ring at constant temperature and pressure. In particular, the Clapeyron equation would take
the form

     dp              h­  hż                                                   (11.41)
    ab
    dT sat T 1v­  vż 2
506 Chapter 11 Thermodynamic Relations

                    where  and  denote the respective phases, and (dpdT )sat is the slope of the relevant satu-
                    ration pressure­temperature curve.

                       The Clapeyron equation shows that the slope of a saturation line on a phase diagram de-
                    pends on the signs of the specific volume and enthalpy changes accompanying the phase
                    change. In most cases, when a phase change takes place with an increase in specific enthalpy,
                    the specific volume also increases, and (dpdT )sat is positive. However, in the case of the
                    melting of ice and a few other substances, the specific volume decreases on melting. The
                    slope of the saturated solid­liquid curve for these few substances is negative, as was pointed
                    out in Sec. 3.2.2 in the discussion of phase diagrams.

                       An approximate form of Eq. 11.40 can be derived when the following two idealizations
                    are justified: (1) vf is negligible in comparison to vg, and (2) the pressure is low enough that
                    vg can be evaluated from the ideal gas equation of state as vg  RTp. With these, Eq. 11.40
                    becomes

                                                      dp        hg  hf
                                                     ab
                                                                RT 2p
                                                      dT sat

                    which can be rearranged to read

                                                      d ln p      hg  hf          (11.42)
                                                     ab            RT 2

                                                        dT sat

Clausius­Clapeyron  Equation 11.42 is called the Clausius­Clapeyron equation. A similar expression applies for
equation            the case of sublimation.

                       The use of the Clapeyron equation in any of the foregoing forms requires an accurate rep-
                    resentation for the relevant saturation pressure­temperature curve. This must not only depict
                    the pressure­temperature variation accurately but also enable accurate values of the deriva-
                    tive (dpdT )sat to be determined. Analytical representations in the form of equations are com-
                    monly used. Different equations for different portions of the pressure­temperature curves
                    may be required. These equations can involve several constants. One form that is used for
                    the vapor-pressure curves is the four-constant equation

                                        ln  psat       A    B     C  ln  T    DT
                                                            T

                    in which the constants A, B, C, D are determined empirically.
                       The use of the Clapeyron equation for evaluating changes in specific entropy, internal en-

                    ergy, and enthalpy accompanying a phase change at fixed T and p is illustrated in the next
                    example.

E X A M P L E 1 1 . 4 Applying the Clapeyron Equation

Using p­v­T data for saturated water, calculate at 100C (a) hg  hf, (b) ug  uf, (c) sg  sf. Compare with the respective
steam table value.

SOLUTION
Known: The system consists of a unit mass of saturated water at 100C.
Find: Using saturation data, determine at 100C the change on vaporization of the specific enthalpy, specific internal energy,
and specific entropy, and compare with the respective steam table value.
Analysis: For comparison, Table A-2 gives at 100C, hg  hf  2257.0 kJ/kg, ug  uf  2087.6 kg/kg, sg  sf  6.048
kJ/kg # K.
                                                     11.4 Evaluating Changes in Entropy, Internal Energy, and Enthalpy 507

(a) The value of hg  hf can be determined from the Clapeyron equation, Eq. 11.40, expressed as

                                                                     1vg    vf2     dp
                                                     hg    hf     T              ab
                                                                                  dT sat

This equation requires a value for the slope (dpdT)sat of the saturation pressure­temperature curve at the specified temperature.
    The required value for (dpdT )sat at 100C can be estimated graphically as follows. Using saturation pressure­temperature

data from the steam tables, the accompanying plot can be prepared. Note that a line drawn tangent to the curve at 100C is
shown on the plot. The slope of this tangent line is about 3570 N/m2 # K. Accordingly, at 100C

                                                          dp            3570    N   K
                                                         ab                   m2 #

                                                          dT sat

                           4

Saturation pressure (bar)  3

                           2

                           1

                           0   60  80 100 120 140
                           40

                                   Temperature (°C)

                                                                Figure E11.4

Inserting values into the above equation for hg  hf gives

                                   hg   hf   1373.15 K2 11.673  1.0435    1032   a  m3  b  a  3570    N   K  b  `     1 kJ  m  `
                                                                                    kg              m2 #           103 N #

                                        2227 kJ/kg

     This value is about 1% less than the value read from the steam tables.

 Alternatively, the derivative (dpdT )sat can be estimated using numerical methods and computer-generated data. The fol-

     lowing IT code illustrates one way the derivative, denoted dpdT, can be estimated:

T = 100 // C
dT = 0.001
T1 = T ­ dT
T2 = T + dT
p1 = Psat("Water/Steam", T1) // bar
p2 = Psat("Water/Steam", T2) // bar
dpdT = ((p2 ­ p1) / (T2 ­ T1)) * 100000

Using the Explore button, sweep dT from 0.001 to 0.01 in steps of 0.001. Then, reading the limiting value from the computer
data

                                                          dp            3616    N   K
                                                         ab                   m2 #

                                                          dT sat

When this value is used in the above expression for hg  hf, the result is hg  hf  2256 kJ/kg, which agrees very closely
with the value read from the steam tables.
508 Chapter 11 Thermodynamic Relations

(b) With Eq. 11.39

                                        ug  uf  hg  hf  psat1vg  vf2

Inserting the IT result for (hg  hf) from part (a) together with saturation data at 100C

                    ug  uf   2256 kJ          a1.014         105  N   b  a1.672  m3  b  `     1 kJ  m  `
                                      kg                          m2             kg        103 N #

                             2086.5 kJ
                                        kg

which also agrees closely with the value from the steam tables.

(c) With Eq. 11.38 and the IT result for (hg  hf) from part (a)

                            sg    sf      hg     hf          2256 kJ/kg               kJ
                                              T               373.15 K       6.046 kg # K

which again agrees very closely with the steam table value.

 Also, (dpdT)sat might be obtained by differentiating an analytical expression for the vapor pressure curve, as discussed in

    Sec. 11.4.1 above.

                     11.4.2 Considering Single-Phase Regions

                    The objective of the present section is to derive expressions for evaluating s, u, and h
                    between states in single-phase regions. These expressions require both p­v­T data and ap-
                    propriate specific heat data. Since single-phase regions are under present consideration, any
                    two of the properties pressure, specific volume, and temperature can be regarded as the in-
                    dependent properties that fix the state. Two convenient choices are T, v and T, p.

                    T AND v AS INDEPENDENT PROPERTIES. With temperature and specific volume as the
                    independent properties that fix the state, the specific entropy can be regarded as a function
                    of the form s  s(T, v). The differential of this function is

                                                                       0s                  0s
                                                             ds  a b dT  a b dv
                                                                       0T v                0v T

                    The partial derivative (0s0v)T appearing in this expression can be replaced using the Maxwell
                    relation, Eq. 11.34, giving

                                                                       0s                  0p
                                                             ds  a b dT  a b dv                           (11.43)
                                                                       0T v                0T v

                       The specific internal energy also can be regarded as a function of T and v: u  u(T, v).
                    The differential of this function is

                                                             du  a 0u b dT  a 0u b dv
                                                                       0T v                0v T

                    With cv  (0u0T )v

                                                                 du      cv  dT    a  0ub      dv         (11.44)
                                                                                      0v T
                                               11.4 Evaluating Changes in Entropy, Internal Energy, and Enthalpy 509

Substituting Eqs. 11.43 and 11.44 into du  T ds  p dv and collecting terms results in

   0u                     0p                                    0s        cv d
ca b       p      Ta b d                       dv        cTa b                  dT  (11.45)
   0v T               0T v                                    0T v

Since specific volume and temperature can be varied independently, let us hold specific vol-
ume constant and vary temperature. That is, let dv  0 and dT 0. It then follows from
Eq. 11.45 that

                                                a 0s b  cv                          (11.46)
                                                  0T v T

Similarly, suppose that dT  0 and dv 0. It then follows that

                      0u                          0p
                  a b  Ta b  p                                                      (11.47)
                      0v T                     0T v

   Equations 11.46 and 11.47 are additional examples of useful thermodynamic property

relations.  for example. . . Equation 11.47, which expresses the dependence of the spe-

cific internal energy on specific volume at fixed temperature, allows us to demonstrate that the
internal energy of a gas whose equation of state is pv  RT depends on temperature alone,
a result first discussed in Sec. 3.5. Equation 11.47 requires the partial derivative (0p0T )v.
If p  RTv, the derivative is (0p0T )v  Rv. Introducing this, Eq. 11.47 gives

a  0ub     T   a  0p                      p    T  a   R  b    p     p     p     0
   0v T              b                                v

                  0T v

This demonstrates that when pv  RT, the specific internal energy is independent of specific
volume and depends on temperature alone. 

   Continuing the discussion, when Eq. 11.46 is inserted in Eq. 11.43, the following ex-
pression results

                  ds      cv              dT       a  0p    dv                      (11.48)
                                                         b
                          T                           0T v

Inserting Eq. 11.47 into Eq. 11.44 gives

                                                     0p       pd
           du     cv dT                      cT a b                 dv              (11.49)
                                                  0T v

Observe that the right sides of Eqs. 11.48 and 11.49 are expressed solely in terms of p, v, T,
and cv.

   Changes in specific entropy and internal energy between two states are determined by in-
tegration of Eqs. 11.48 and 11.49, respectively

                  2 cv dT                         2 0p
                  1T                                a b dv
     s2  s1                                                                         (11.50)
                                                  1 0T v                            (11.51)

                    2                             2         0p

   u2  u1           cv dT                             c T a b  p d dv
                                                            0T v
                  1                               1

To integrate the first term on the right of each of these expressions, the variation of cv
with temperature at one fixed specific volume (isometric) is required. Integration of the
510 Chapter 11 Thermodynamic Relations
                                        p

                                              2  vx = vy

                                           1                 y

                                                          x   T2 = Ty
                                           cv = cv(T, vx)    T1 = Tx

                                                                        v   Figure 11.2 Integration path between
                                                                           two vapor states.

second term requires knowledge of the p­v­T relation at the states of interest. An equa-
tion of state explicit in pressure would be particularly convenient for evaluating the inte-
grals involving (0p0T )v. The accuracy of the resulting specific entropy and internal en-
ergy changes would depend on the accuracy of this derivative. In cases where the
integrands of Eqs. 11.50 and 11.51 are too complicated to be integrated in closed form
they may be evaluated numerically. Whether closed-form or numerical integration is used,
attention must be given to the path of integration.

    for example. . . let us consider the evaluation of Eq. 11.51. Referring to Fig. 11.2,
if the specific heat cv is known as a function of temperature along the isometric (constant
specific volume) passing through the states x and y, one possible path of integration for de-
termining the change in specific internal energy between states 1 and 2 is 1­x­y­2. The in-
tegration would be performed in three steps. Since the temperature is constant from state 1
to state x, the first integral of Eq. 11.51 would vanish, so

                                              ux  u1             vx        0p
                                                                      c T a b  p d dv
                                                                           0T v
                                                                v1

From state x to y, the specific volume is constant and cv is known as a function of temper-
ature only, so

                             Ty

                                           uy  ux  cv dT

                                                                                          Tx

where Tx  T1 and Ty  T2. From state y to state 2, the temperature is constant once again,
and

                                           u2  uy                v2        0p
                                                                        c T a b  p d dv
                                                                           0T v
                                                                vy  vx

When these are added, the result is the change in specific internal energy between states 1
and 2. 

T AND p AS INDEPENDENT PROPERTIES. In this section a presentation parallel to that
considered above is provided for the choice of temperature and pressure as the independent
properties. With this choice for the independent properties, the specific entropy can be re-
garded as a function of the form s  s(T, p). The differential of this function is

                                                                0s             0s
                                              ds  a b dT  a b dp
                                                                0T p           0p T
                                                    11.4 Evaluating Changes in Entropy, Internal Energy, and Enthalpy 511

The partial derivative (0s0p)T appearing in this expression can be replaced using the Maxwell

relation, Eq. 11.35, giving

                                ds  a 0s b dT  a 0v b dp                           (11.52)
                                          0T p           0T p

   The specific enthalpy also can be regarded as a function of T and p: h  h(T, p). The dif-
ferential of this function is

                                dh  a 0h b dT  a 0hb dp
                                          0T p           0p T

With cp  (0h0T )p

                                                       0h
                                dh        cp  dT       ab      dp                  (11.53)
                                                        0p T

Substituting Eqs. 11.52 and 11.53 into dh  T ds  v dp and collecting terms results in

                   0h               0v                           0s      cp d
                   ca b       Ta b            vd  dp     cTa b                 dT  (11.54)
                      0p T        0T p                        0T p

Since pressure and temperature can be varied independently, let us hold pressure constant
and vary temperature. That is, let dp  0 and dT 0. It then follows from Eq. 11.54 that

                                                 a 0s b  cp                        (11.55)
                                                  0T p T

Similarly, when dT  0 and dp 0, Eq. 11.54 gives

                                    0h                     0v
                                  a b vTa b                                        (11.56)
                                    0p T                   0T p

Equations 11.55 and 11.56, like Eqs. 11.46 and 11.47, are useful thermodynamic property
relations.

   When Eq. 11.55 is inserted in Eq. 11.52, the following equation results:

                                ds        cp           a 0vb   dp                  (11.57)
                                            dT         0T p
                                           T

Introducing Eq. 11.56 into Eq. 11.53 gives

                                                             0v
                            dh      cp dT       cv     Ta b d        dp            (11.58)
                                                           0T p

Observe that the right sides of Eqs. 11.57 and 11.58 are expressed solely in terms of p, v, T,

and cp.
   Changes in specific entropy and enthalpy between two states are found by integrating

Eqs. 11.57 and 11.58, respectively

                                    2 cp dT         2 0v
                                    1T                a b dp
                     s2  s1                                                        (11.59)
                                                    1 0T p                         (11.60)

                                      2             2              0v

                   h2  h1             cp dT            c v  T a b d dp
                                                                   0T p
                                    1               1
512 Chapter 11 Thermodynamic Relations

    To integrate the first term on the right of each of these expressions, the variation of cp with
    temperature at one fixed pressure (isobar) is required. Integration of the second term requires

    knowledge of the p­v­T behavior at the states of interest. An equation of state explicit in v

    would be particularly convenient for evaluating the integrals involving (0v0T )p. The accu-

    racy of the resulting specific entropy and enthalpy changes would depend on the accuracy

    of this derivative.
       Changes in specific enthalpy and internal energy are related through h  u  pv by

                                                 h2  h1  1u2  u12  1 p2v2  p1v12                           (11.61)

    Hence, only one of h and u need be found by integration. Then, the other can be eval-
    uated from Eq. 11.61. Which of the two property changes is found by integration depends
    on the information available. h would be found using Eq. 11.60 when an equation of
    state explicit in v and cp as a function of temperature at some fixed pressure are known.
    u would be found from Eq. 11.51 when an equation of state explicit in p and cv as a
    function of temperature at some specific volume are known. Such issues are considered

    in Example 11.5.

E X A M P L E 1 1 . 5 Evaluating s, u, and h of a Gas

Using the Redlich­Kwong equation of state, develop expressions for the changes in specific entropy, internal energy, and en-
thalpy of a gas between two states where the temperature is the same, T1  T2, and the pressures are p1 and p2, respectively.
SOLUTION
Known: Two states of a unit mass of a gas as the system are fixed by p1 and T1 at state 1 and p2, T2 ( T1) at state 2.
Find: Determine the changes in specific entropy, internal energy, and enthalpy between these two states.
Schematic and Given Data:

   p

    2                                   Assumption: The Redlich­Kwong equation of state represents the p­v­T
            1
p2                                      behavior at these states and yields accurate values for (0p0T )v.
p1
    Isotherm

    v2 v1 v                              Figure E11.5

Analysis: The Redlich­Kwong equation of state is explicit in pressure, so Eqs. 11.50 and 11.51 are selected for determin-
ing s2  s1 and u2  u1. Since T1  T2, an isothermal path of integration between the two states is convenient. Thus, these
equations reduce to give

                                                 2 0p
                                        s2  s1     a b dv
                                                 1 0T v

                                                 2     0p
                                        u2  u1      c T a b  p d dv
                                                       0T v
                                                 1
                                                                                                   11.5 Other Thermodynamic Relations 513

    The limits for each of the foregoing integrals are the specific volumes v1 and v2 at the two states under consideration.
Using p1, p2, and the known temperature, these specific volumes would be determined from the Redlich­Kwong equation of
state. Since this equation is not explicit in specific volume, the use of an equation solver such as Interactive Thermodynamics:

IT is recommended.
    The above integrals involve the partial derivative (0p0T )v, which can be determined from the Redlich­Kwong equation

of state as

                                       0p                     R                       a
                                      ab                            
                                       0T v               v      b    2v1v               b2  T 32

Inserting this into the expression for (s2  s1) gives

             s2  s1              v2    c     R                        a  b2 T 32 d       dv
                                        v
                                  v1                   b      2v1v  

                                 v2          R                   a1 1                         bd
                                       c                              a                      b     dv
                                        v              b      2bT 32   v           v     
                                  v1

                                R  ln  a v2               b         a       c ln   a v2 b          ln  a v2          b
                                        v1                 b     2bT 32             v1                  v1            bd

                                                          b                                                          b

                                R  ln  a v2               b         a          ln  c  v21v1        b2     d
                                        v1                 b     2 bT 32              v11v2        b2

                                                          b

With the Redlich­Kwong equation, the integrand of the expression for (u2  u1) becomes

                  0p      pd    T cv   R     b            2v1v    a   b  2  T  32  d         c  v  RT  b           v1v    a  T   1  2  d
             cT a b                                                                                                      b2

                  0T v

                                2v1v   3a              T 12
                                        b2

Accordingly

                                v2     3a                                   3a           v2 1                   1
             u2  u1           v1 2v1v  b2 T 12 dv  2 bT 12                                   a                       b dv
                                                                                         v1 v v  b

                                3a     c ln  v2           ln a v2        b                 3a      ln        c  v21v1      b2
                              2 bT 12        v1               v1          bd             2 bT 12                v11v2      b2 d

                                                                         b

Finally, (h2  h1) would be determined using Eq. 11.61 together with the known values of (u2  u1), p1, v1, p2, and v2.

11.5 Other Thermodynamic Relations

The presentation to this point has been directed mainly at developing thermodynamic relations
that allow changes in u, h, and s to be evaluated from measured property data. The object of
the present section is to introduce several other thermodynamic relations that are useful for
thermodynamic analysis. Each of the properties considered has a common attribute: it is de-
fined in terms of a partial derivative of some other property. The specific heats cv and cp are
examples of this type of property.

 11.5.1 Volume Expansivity, Isothermal and
                  Isentropic Compressibility

In single-phase regions, pressure and temperature are independent, and we can think of the spe-
cific volume as being a function of these two, v  v(T, p). The differential of such a function is

                              0v                          0v
             dv  a b dT  a b dp
                              0T p                        0p T
514 Chapter 11 Thermodynamic Relations

                                    Two thermodynamic properties related to the partial derivatives appearing in this differ-
                                ential are the volume expansivity , also called the coefficient of volume expansion

volume expansivity                                               b      1    0v                 (11.62)
                                                                        v  ab

                                                                            0T p

                            and the isothermal compressibility 

isothermal                                                       k      v1  a  0v               (11.63)
compressibility                                                                   b

                                                                               0p T

                            By inspection, the unit for  is seen to be the reciprocal of that for temperature and the unit
                            for  is the reciprocal of that for pressure. The volume expansivity is an indication of the
                            change in volume that occurs when temperature changes while pressure remains constant.
                            The isothermal compressibility is an indication of the change in volume that takes place when
                            pressure changes while temperature remains constant. The value of  is positive for all sub-
                            stances in all phases.

                               The volume expansivity and isothermal compressibility are thermodynamic properties,
                            and like specific volume are functions of T and p. Values for  and  are provided in hand-
                            books of engineering data. Table 11.2 gives values of these properties for liquid water at a
                            pressure of 1 atm versus temperature. For a pressure of 1 atm, water has a state of maximum
                            density at about 4C. At this state, the value of  is zero.

                               The isentropic compressibility  is an indication of the change in volume that occurs
                            when pressure changes while entropy remains constant

isentropic compressibility                                       a      v1  a  0v               (11.64)
                                                                                  b

                                                                               0p s

                            The unit for  is the reciprocal of that for pressure.
                               The isentropic compressibility is related to the speed at which sound travels in the sub-

                            stance, and such speed measurements can be used to determine . In Sec. 9.12, the velocity
                            of sound, or sonic velocity, is introduced as

velocity of sound                         c                         B v2       a  0p            (9.36b)
                                                                                     b

                                                                                  0v s

                            TABLE 11.2 Volume Expansivity  and Isothermal Compressibility
                             of Liquid Water at 1 atm versus Temperature

                            T    Density    106                                           106

                            (C)  (kg/m3)                         (K)1                   (bar)1

                            0    999.84   68.14                                         50.89

                            10   999.70                          87.90                  47.81

                            20   998.21                          206.6                  45.90

                            30   995.65                          303.1                  44.77

                            40   992.22                          385.4                  44.24

                            50   988.04                          457.8                  44.18
                                                                                 11.5 Other Thermodynamic Relations 515

The relationship of the isentropic compressibility and the velocity of sound can be obtained
using the relation between partial derivatives expressed by Eq. 11.15. Identifying p with x, v
with y, and s with z, we have

                                          0p            1
                                      ab
                                       0v s          1 0v 0p2s

With this, the previous two equations can be combined to give

                                              c  1va                                    (11.65)

The details are left as an exercise.

 11.5.2 Relations Involving Specific Heats

In this section, general relations are obtained for the difference between specific heats (cp  cv)
and the ratio of specific heats cpcv.

EVALUATING (cp  cv). An expression for the difference between cp and cv can be obtained
by equating the two differentials for entropy given by Eqs. 11.48 and 11.57 and rearranging
to obtain

                                                    0p                 0v
                1cp    cv2            dT      T  a     b dv      T  a b dp
                                                    0T v             0T p

Considering the equation of state p  p(T, v), the differential dp can be expressed as

                                          0p               0p
                       dp  b dT  b dv
                                          0T v             0v T

Eliminating dp between the last two equations and collecting terms gives

                     0v 0p                                       0v 0p       0p
c 1cp    cv2    T    a ba bd                     dT     T  ca b a b          a bd   dv
                      0T p 0T v                               0T p 0v T       0T v

Since temperature and specific volume can be varied independently, the coefficients of the
differentials in this expression must vanish, so

                                                        0v 0p
                       cp                 cv     T  a      b  a     b                   (11.66)
                                                        0T p     0T v

                                      0p                0v 0p
                           a b  a b a b                                                 (11.67)
                                      0T v              0T p 0v T

Introducing Eq. 11.67 into Eq. 11.66 gives

                                                 T      0v 2 0p
                       cp             cv             ab          ab                     (11.68)
                                                      0T p        0v T

This equation allows cv to be calculated from observed values of cp, or conversely, knowing
only p­v­T data.  for example. . . for the special case of an ideal gas, Eq. 11.68 re-
duces to Eq. 3.44, as can readily be shown. 

   The right side of Eq. 11.68 can be expressed in terms of the volume expansivity  and
the isothermal compressibility . Introducing Eqs. 11.62 and 11.63, we get

                                                         Tb2                            (11.69)
                                          cp  cv  v k
516 Chapter 11 Thermodynamic Relations

In developing this result, the relationship between partial derivatives expressed by Eq. 11.15

has been used.

   Several important conclusions about the specific heats cp and cv can be drawn from
Eq. 11.69.  for example. . . since the factor 2 cannot be negative and  is positive

for all substances in all phases, the value of cp is always greater than, or equal to, cv.
The specific heats would be equal when   0, as occurs in the case of water at 1 atmos-
phere and 4C, where water is at its state of maximum density. The two specific heats also

become equal as the temperature approaches absolute zero. For some liquids and solids at

certain states, cp and cv differ only slightly. For this reason, tables often give the specific heat
of a liquid or solid without specifying whether it is cp or cv. The data reported are normally
cp values, since these are more easily determined for liquids and solids. 

EVALUATING cpcv. Next, let us obtain expressions for the ratio of specific heats. Em-
ploying Eq. 11.16, we can rewrite Eqs. 11.46 and 11.55, respectively, as

                                            cv    a 0s b            1
                                            T      0T v
                                                            10v0s2T 10T0v2s

                                            cp      0s              1
                                            T     ab
                                                            10p0s2T 10T0p2s
                                                   0T p

Forming the ratio of these equations gives

                                                  cp    10v0s2T 10T0v2s              (11.70)
                                                  cv    10p0s2T 10T0p2s

Since (0s0p)T  1(0p0s)T and (0p0T )s  1(0T0p)s, Eq. 11.70 can be expressed as

                                        cp         0v     a 0s b  d ca 0pb a 0Tb  d  (11.71)
                                        cv      ca b
                                                   0s T 0p T 0T s 0v s

Finally, the chain rule from calculus allows us to write (0v0p)T  (0v0s)T (0s0p)T and
(0p0v)s  (0p0T )s (0T0v)s, so Eq. 11.71 becomes

                                                k     cp     0v    0p                (11.72)
                                                            ab    ab
                                                      cv    0p T 0v s

This can be expressed alternatively in terms of the isothermal and isentropic compressibilities as

                                                          k k                        (11.73)
                                                               a

  Solving Eq. 11.72 for (0p0v)s and substituting the resulting expression into Eq. 9.36b

gives the following relationship involving the velocity of sound c and the specific heat ratio k

                                                  c  2kv21 0p0v2T                    (11.74)

Equation 11.74 can be used to determine c knowing the specific heat ratio and p­v­T data,
or to evaluate k knowing c and (0p0v)T.  for example. . . in the special case of an
ideal gas, Eq. 11.74 reduces to

                                                c  1kRT 1ideal gas2                  (9.37)

as can easily be verified. 

In the next example we illustrate the use of specific heat relations introduced above.
                                                                                                          11.5 Other Thermodynamic Relations 517

  E X A M P L E 1 1 . 6 Using Specific Heat Relations
  For liquid water at 1 atm and 20C, estimate (a) the percent error in cv that would result if it were assumed that cp  cv,
  (b) the velocity of sound, in m /s.

  SOLUTION
  Known: The system consists of a fixed amount of liquid water at 1 atm and 20C.

  Find: Estimate the percent error in cv that would result if cv were approximated by cp, and the velocity of sound,
  in m/s.

  Analysis:
  (a) Equation 11.69 gives the difference between cp and cv. Table 11.2 provides the required values for the volume expansiv-
  ity , the isothermal compressibility , and the specific volume. Thus

                 Tb2
  cp  cv  v

                  k

             1                 1293    K2  a 206.6                       106           2  a  bar     106 b
    a 998.21 kg/m3 b                                                  K
                                                                                     b       45.90 

    a272.96               106  bar  #  m3  b  `                       105 N/m2           1 kJ
                               kg   #  K                                          `  ` 103 N # m `

                                                                        1 bar

    0.027               kJ
                      kg # K

 Interpolating in Table A-19 at 20C gives cp  4.188 kJ/kg # K. Thus, the value of cv is

                                                          cv  4.188  0.027  4.161 kJ/kg # K

  Using these values, the percent error in approximating cv by cp is

    a cp  cv b 11002  a 0.027 b 11002  0.6%
                      cv                 4.161

  (b) The velocity of sound at this state can be determined using Eq. 11.65. The required value for the isentropic compressibility
   is calculable in terms of the specific heat ratio k and the isothermal compressibility . With Eq. 11.73,   k. Inserting
  this into Eq. 11.65 results in the following expression for the velocity of sound

                               c         A    kv
                                              k

      The values of v and  required by this expression are the same as used in part (a). Also, with the values of cp and cv from
  part (a), the specific heat ratio is k  1.006. Accordingly

               11.0062 11062 bar 105 N/m2 1 kg # m /s2
  c  B 1998.21 kg/m32 145.902 ` 1 bar ` ` 1 N `  1482 m/s

   Consistent with the discussion of Sec. 3.3.6, we take cp at 1 atm and 20C as the saturated liquid value at 20C.
   The result of part (a) shows that for liquid water at the given state, cp and cv are closely equal.
   For comparison, the velocity of sound in air at 1 atm, 20C is about 343 m/s, which can be checked using Eq. 9.37.
518 Chapter 11 Thermodynamic Relations

                   11.5.3 Joule­Thomson Coefficient

                  The value of the specific heat cp can be determined from p­v­T data and the Joule­Thomson
                  coefficient. The Joule­Thomson coefficient J is defined as

Joule­Thomson                                           a  0T  b                 (11.75)
coefficient
                                                mJ         0p    h

                  Like other partial differential coefficients introduced in this section, the Joule­Thomson co-

                  efficient is defined in terms of thermodynamic properties only and thus is itself a property.
                  The units of J are those of temperature divided by pressure.

                     A relationship between the specific heat cp and the Joule­Thomson coefficient J can be
                  established by using Eq. 11.16 to write

                                        a 0Tb    0p     a 0hb        1
                                                ab
                                        0p h 0h T 0T p

                  The first factor in this expression is the Joule­Thomson coefficient and the third is cp. Thus

                                            cp          1

                                                    mJ 1 0p0h2T

                  With (0h0p)T  1(0p0h)T from Eq. 11.15, this can be written as

                                            cp      1      a   0hb               (11.76)
                                                      mJ       0p T

                  The partial derivative (0d0p)T, called the constant-temperature coefficient, can be eliminated

                  from Eq. 11.76 by use of Eq. 11.56. The following expression results:

                                                1 0v
                                        cp          cT  ab            vd         (11.77)
                                                mJ       0T p

inversion states  Equation 11.77 allows the value of cp at a state to be determined using p­v­T data and the
                  value of the Joule­Thomson coefficient at that state. Let us consider next how the
                  Joule­Thomson coefficient can be found experimentally.

                  EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION. The Joule­Thomson coefficient can be evaluated experi-
                  mentally using an apparatus like that pictured in Fig. 11.3. Consider first Fig. 11.3a, which
                  shows a porous plug through which a gas (or liquid) may pass. During operation at steady
                  state, the gas enters the apparatus at a specified temperature T1 and pressure p1 and expands
                  through the plug to a lower pressure p2, which is controlled by an outlet valve. The temper-
                  ature T2 at the exit is measured. The apparatus is designed so that the gas undergoes a
                  throttling process (Sec. 4.3) as it expands from 1 to 2. Accordingly, the exit state fixed by
                  p2 and T2 has the same value for the specific enthalpy as at the inlet, h2  h1. By progres-
                  sively lowering the outlet pressure, a finite sequence of such exit states can be visited, as in-
                  dicated on Fig. 11.3b. A curve may be drawn through the set of data points. Such a curve is
                  called an isenthalpic (constant enthalpy) curve. An isenthalpic curve is the locus of all points
                  representing equilibrium states of the same specific enthalpy.

                     The slope of an isenthalpic curve at any state is the Joule­Thomson coefficient at that state.
                  The slope may be positive, negative, or zero in value. States where the coefficient has a zero
                  value are called inversion states. Notice that not all lines of constant h have an inversion state.
                  The uppermost curve of Fig. 11.3b, for example, always has a negative slope. Throttling a gas
                                                                                   11.5 Other Thermodynamic Relations 519

Thermodynamics in the News...

Small Power Plants Pack Punch                                       disastrous. Businesses such as
                                                                    shopping centers also must
An innovation in power systems moving from concept to re-           avoid costly service interrup-
ality promises to help keep computer networks humming, hos-         tions. With microturbine-based
pital operating rooms lit, and shopping centers thriving. Called    systems, the needed reliability
distributed power systems, compact power plants provide             is provided by modular units
electricity for small loads or are linked for larger applications.  that can run virtually unat-
With distributed power, consumers hope to avoid unpre-              tended for years.
dictable price swings and brownouts that have plagued some
regions of the country.                                                 Microturbines are also well
                                                                    suited for cogeneration, provid-
    At the heart of many distributed power systems are clev-        ing both power and heating for
erly engineered gas turbine units, called microturbines, less       buildings or other uses. They
than one-fifth the size of utility gas turbines with fewer mov-     also can be effectively inter-
ing parts. They also emit less nitric oxide (NOX) pollution.        grated with fuel cells and energy storage units. Self-contained
                                                                    power systems are especially attractive in places such as de-
    Although the cost per kilowatt hour may be higher with mi-      veloping nations where the power grid may be unreliable or
croturbines, some customers are willing to pay more to gain         even nonexistent.
control over their electric supply. Computer networks and hos-
pitals need high reliability, since even short disruptions can be

from an initial state on this curve would result in an increase in temperature. However, for
isenthalpic curves having an inversion state, the temperature at the exit of the apparatus may
be greater than, equal to, or less than the initial temperature, depending on the exit pressure
specified. For states to the right of an inversion state, the value of the Joule­Thomson coef-
ficient would be negative. For these states, the temperature would increase as the pressure at
the exit of the apparatus is reduced. At states to the left of an inversion state, the value of the
Joule­Thomson coefficient would be positive. For these states, the temperature would decrease
as the pressure at the exit of the device is reduced. This can be used to advantage in systems
designed to liquefy gases.

                                                                  T

Inlet                  Inversion state
T1, p1
                               Inversion
                                 state

          Porous plug                                               Inversion      Inlet state
        T2, p2                                                        state         (T1, p1)

                                                                         Critical  ( )­Tp­ h
                                                                           point

                       Vapor

                                                                    Liquid

                       Triple                                       Solid
                       point
            Valve
        (a)                                                                                     p

                                                                            (b)

 Figure 11.3 Joule­Thomson expansion. (a) Apparatus. (b) Isenthalpics on a T­p diagram.
520 Chapter 11 Thermodynamic Relations

11.6 Constructing Tables of
           Thermodynamic Properties

The objective of this section is to utilize the thermodynamic relations introduced thus far to
describe how tables of thermodynamic properties can be constructed. The characteristics of
the tables under consideration are embodied in the tables for water and the refrigerants pre-
sented in the Appendix. The methods introduced in this section are extended in Chap. 13 for
the analysis of reactive systems, such as gas turbine and vapor power systems involving com-
bustion. The methods of this section also provide the basis for computer retrieval of ther-
modynamic property data.

    Two different approaches for constructing property tables are considered:

 The presentation of Sec. 11.6.1 employs the methods introduced in Sec. 11.4 for assign-
   ing specific enthalpy, specific internal energy, and specific entropy to states of pure,
   simple compressible substances using p­v­T data, together with a limited amount of
   specific heat data. The principal mathematical operation of this approach is integration.

 The approach of Sec. 11.6.2 utilizes the fundamental thermodynamic function concept
    introduced in Sec. 11.3.3. Once such a function has been constructed, the principal
    mathematical operation required to determine all other properties is differentiation.

 11.6.1 Developing Tables by Integration Using p­v­T and
                  Specific Heat Data

In principle, all properties of present interest can be determined using

                                                  cp  cp01T 2              (11.78)
                                        p  p1v, T 2, v  v1 p, T 2

In Eqs. 11.78, cp0(T ) is the specific heat cp for the substance under consideration extrapo-
lated to zero pressure. This function might be determined from data obtained calorimetrically

or from spectroscopic data, using equations supplied by statistical mechanics. Specific heat
expressions for several gases are given in Tables A-21. The expressions p(v, T) and v(p, T)

represent functions that describe the saturation pressure­temperature curves, as well as the
p­v­T relations for the single-phase regions. These functions may be tabular, graphical, or

analytical in character. Whatever their forms, however, the functions must not only represent

the p­v­T data accurately but also yield accurate values for derivatives such as (0v0T )p and

(dpdT )sat.
   Figure 11.4 shows eight states of a substance. Let us consider how values can be assigned

to specific enthalpy and specific entropy at these states. The same procedures can be used to

assign property values at other states of interest. Note that when h has been assigned to a
state, the specific internal energy at that state can be found from u  h  pv.

 Let the state denoted by 1 on Fig. 11.4 be selected as the datum state for enthalpy and
   entropy. Any value can be assigned to h and s at this state, but a value of zero would be
   usual. It should be noted that the use of an arbitrary datum state and arbitrary reference
   values for specific enthalpy and specific entropy suffices only for evaluations involving
   differences in property values between states of the same composition, for then datums
   cancel.

 Once a value is assigned to enthalpy at state 1, the enthalpy at the saturated vapor state,
   state 2, can be determined using the Clapeyron equation, Eq. 11.40

                                                    T11v2    v12  dp
                                        h2    h1                  ab
                                                                   dT sat
                                                                      11.6 Constructing Tables of Thermodynamic Properties 521

T                                          Isobar­
          8                           reduced pressure
                           7           pR low enough
                                      for the ideal gas

                                         model to be
                                         appropriate

                                                      65

1                                  2       34

   Arbitrary datum                                         Figure 11.4 T­v diagram used to dis-
                                                          cuss how h and s can be assigned to liquid
   state h1 = s1 = 0                                 v and vapor states.

where the derivative (dpdT )sat and the specific volumes v1 and v2 are obtained from
appropriate representations of the p­v­T data for the substance under consideration.

The specific entropy at state 2 is found using Eq. 11.38 in the form

                                           s2    s1       h2      h1
                                                              T1

 Proceeding at constant temperature from state 2 to state 3, the entropy and enthalpy are
   found by means of Eqs. 11.59 and 11.60, respectively. Since temperature is fixed, these
   equations reduce to give

                              p3 0v                                    p3                0v
   s3  s2                          a b dp      and        h3  h2           c v  T a b d dp
                                    0T p                                                 0T p
                              p2                                      p2

   With the same procedure, s4 and h4 can be determined.

 The isobar (constant-pressure line) passing through state 4 is assumed to be at a low
   enough pressure for the ideal gas model to be appropriate. Accordingly, to evaluate
   s and h at states such as 5 on this isobar, the only required information would be cp0(T )
   and the temperatures at these states. Thus, since pressure if fixed, Eqs. 11.59 and 11.60
   give, respectively

         T5 dT                                      and               T5

   s5  s4  T4 cp0 T                                           h5  h4  cp0 dT

                                                                                     T4

 Specific entropy and enthalpy values at states 6 and 7 are found from those at state 5
   by the same procedure used in assigning values at states 3 and 4 from those at state 2.
   Finally, s8 and h8 are obtained from the values at state 7 using the Clapeyron equation.

 11.6.2 Developing Tables by Differentiating a Fundamental
                  Thermodynamic Function

Property tables also can be developed using a fundamental thermodynamic function. It is con-
venient for this purpose to select the independent variables of the fundamental function from
among pressure, specific volume (density), and temperature. This indicates the use of the
Helmholtz function (T, v) or the Gibbs function g(T, p). The properties of water tabulated
in Tables A-2 through A-6 have been calculated using the Helmholtz function. Fundamental
functions also have been employed successfully to evaluate the properties of other substances.

   The development of a fundamental function requires considerable mathematical manipu-
lation and numerical evaluation. Prior to the advent of high-speed computers, the evaluation
522 Chapter 11 Thermodynamic Relations

of properties by this means was not feasible, and the approach described in Sec. 11.6.1 was
used exclusively. The fundamental function approach involves three steps:

1. The first step is the selection of a functional form in terms of the appropriate pair of
   independent properties and a set of adjustable coefficients, which may number 50 or more.
   The functional form is specified on the basis of both theoretical and practical considerations.

2. Next, the coefficients in the fundamental function are determined by requiring that a set of
   carefully selected property values and/or observed conditions be satisfied in a least-squares
   sense. This generally involves the use of property data requiring the assumed functional
   form to be differentiated one or more times, such as p­v­T and specific heat data.

3. When all coefficients have been evaluated, the function is carefully tested for accuracy
   by using it to evaluate properties for which accepted values are known. These may
   include properties requiring differentiation of the fundamental function two or more
   times. For example, velocity of sound and Joule­Thomson data might be used.

This procedure for developing a fundamental function is not routine and can be accomplished
only with a computer. However, once a suitable fundamental function is established, extreme
accuracy in and consistency among the thermodynamic properties is possible.

   The form of the Helmholtz function used in constructing the steam tables from which
Tables A-2 through A-6 have been extracted is

                                        c1r, T 2  c01T 2  RT 3 ln r  rQ1r, t2 4            (11.79)

where 0 and Q are given as the sums listed in Table 11.3. The independent variables are
density and temperature. The variable  denotes 1000T. Values for pressure, specific internal

TABLE 11.3 Fundamental Equation Used to Construct the Steam Tablesa,b

                                           c  c01T 2  RT 3 ln r  rQ 1r, t2 4                               (1)

where

                                                      6

                                        c0  a Ci ti1  C7 ln T  C8 ln Tt                                    (2)

                                                      i1

and

                                        7                   8                       10

       Q  1t  tc2 a 1t  taj2 j2 c a Aij1r  raj2i1  eEr a Aijri9 d                                          (3)

                                        j1                  i1                      i9

In (1), (2), and (3), T denotes temperature on the Kelvin scale,  denotes 1000T,  denotes

density in g/cm3, R  4.6151 bar # cm3 / g # K or 0.46151 J/g # K, tc  1000Tc  1.544912,

E  4.8, and

                                        taj  tc1 j  12          raj  0.634 1 j  12
                                              2.5 1 j 7 12            1.0 1 j 7 12

The coefficients for 0 in J/g are given as follows:

                                        C1  1857.065      C4  36.6649  C7  46.0
                                        C2  3229.12       C5  20.5516  C8  1011.249
                                        C3  419.465       C6  4.85233

Values for the coefficients Aij are listed in the original source.a

aJ. H. Keenan, F. G. Keyes, P. G. Hill, and J. G. Moore, Steam Tables, Wiley, New York, 1969.

bAlso see L. Haar, J. S. Gallagher, and G. S. Kell, NBS / NRC Steam Tables, Hemisphere, Washington, D.C.,
1984. The properties of water are determined in this reference using a different functional form for the
Helmholtz function than given by Eqs. (1)­(3).
                                                                                    11.6 Constructing Tables of Thermodynamic Properties 523

energy, and specific entropy can be determined by differentiation of Eq. 11.79. Values for
the specific enthalpy and Gibbs function are found from h  u  pv and g    pv, re-
spectively. The specific heat cv is evaluated by further differentiation, cv  (0u0T )v. With
similar operations, other properties can be evaluated. Property values for water calculated
from Eq. 11.79 are in excellent agreement with experimental data over a wide range of con-
ditions. Example 11.7 illustrates this approach for developing tables.

E X A M P L E 1 1 . 7 Determining Properties Using a Fundamental Function

The following expression for the Helmholtz function has been used to determine the properties of water:

                                                   c1 r, T 2  c01T 2  RT 3 ln r  rQ 1r, t2 4

where  denotes density and  denotes 1000T. The functions  0 and Q are sums involving the indicated independent vari-
ables and a number of adjustable constants (see Table 11.3). Obtain expressions for (a) pressure, (b) specific entropy, and
(c) specific internal energy resulting from this fundamental function.

SOLUTION

Known: An expression for the Helmholtz function  is given.

Find: Determine the expressions for pressure, specific entropy, and specific internal energy that result from this fundamen-
tal function.

Analysis: The expressions developed below for p, s, and u require only the functions  0(T ) and Q(, ). Once these func-
tions are determined, p, s, and u can each be determined as a function of density and temperature using elementary mathe-
matical operations.

(a) When expressed in terms of density instead of specific volume, Eq. 11.28 becomes

                                                     p  r2 a 0c b
                                                               0r T

as can easily be verified. When T is held constant  is also constant. Accordingly, the following is obtained on differentiation
of the given function:

                            0c                       RT c 1    Q 1r, t2        0Q      d
                           ab                        r                     ra b
                             0r T                                             0r t

Combining these equations gives an expression for pressure

                             p  rRT c 1  rQ  r2 a 0Q b d
                                                             0r t

(b) From Eq. 11.29

                                                              0c
                                                     s  a b

                                                               0T r

Differentiation of the given expression for  yields

                    a 0cb   dc0                                  0Q                    dt d
                    0T r dT         c R1ln r  rQ2  RTr a b
                                                                              0t r dT

                             dc0    c R1ln r                   rQ2    RTr  a  0Q  b    a10T020  b  d
                             dT                                               0t
                                                                                    r

                             dc0    R c ln r                 rQ          0Q    d
                                                                    rta b
                             dT                                          0t r
524 Chapter 11 Thermodynamic Relations

Combining results gives

                                          s      dc0          R c ln r       rQ          0Q        d
                                                      dT                            rta b
                                                                                             0t r

(c) By definition,   u  Ts. Thus, u    Ts. Introducing the given expression for  together with the expression for
s from part (b) results in

                         u    3 c0    RT 1ln  r    rQ2 4         T  e dc0        R  c ln  r    rQ            0Q    f
                                                                         dT                             rta b d

                                                                                                             0t r

                              c0    T  dc0               0Q
                                       dT        RTrta b

                                                          0t r

This can be written more compactly by noting that

                                       T  dc0      T  dc0   dt      T   dc0  a10T020 b         t      dc0
                                          dT          dt    dT          dt                            dt

Thus,

                                               c0        T  dc0     c0    t  dc0      d1c0t2
                                                            dT               dt         dt

Finally, the expression for u becomes

                                                      u     d1c0t2               0Q
                                                                        RTrt a b
                                                              dt                    0t r

                         11.7 Generalized Charts for
                                    Enthalpy and Entropy

                         Generalized charts giving the compressibility factor Z in terms of the reduced properties pR,
                         TR, and vR are introduced in Sec. 3.4. With such charts, estimates of p­v­T data can be ob-
                         tained rapidly knowing only the critical pressure and critical temperature for the substance
                         of interest. The objective of the present section is to introduce generalized charts that allow
                         changes in enthalpy and entropy to be estimated.

                         GENERALIZED ENTHALPY DEPARTURE CHART

                         The change in specific enthalpy of a gas (or liquid) between two states fixed by temperature
                         and pressure can be evaluated using the identity

                                    h1T2, p22  h1T1, p12  3 h*1T22  h*1T12 4                                          (11.80)
                                                                  5 3 h1T2, p22  h*1T22 4  3 h1T1, p12  h*1T12 4 6

                         The term [h(T, p)  h*(T)] denotes the specific enthalpy of the substance relative to that of
                         its ideal gas model when both are at the same temperature. The superscript * is used in this
                         section to identify ideal gas property values. Thus, Eq. 11.80 indicates that the change in
                         specific enthalpy between the two states equals the enthalpy change determined using the
                         ideal gas model plus a correction that accounts for the departure from ideal gas behavior.
                         The correction is shown underlined in Eq. 11.80. The ideal gas term can be evaluated using
                         methods introduced in Chap. 3. Next, we show how the correction term is evaluated in terms
                         of the enthalpy departure.
                                                                       11.7 Generalized Charts for Enthalpy and Entropy 525

DEVELOPING THE ENTHALPY DEPARTURE. The variation of enthalpy with pressure at
fixed temperature is given by Eq. 11.56 as

                            0h                      0v
                    a b vTa b
                            0p T                    0T p

Integrating from pressure p to pressure p at fixed temperature T

                                       p                     0v
                    h1T, p2  h1T, pż2  c v  T a b d dp
                                                             0T p
                                          pż

This equation is not altered fundamentally by adding and subtracting h*(T ) on the left side.
That is

                                                          p              0v
3 h1T, p2  h*1T 2 4  3h1T, pż2  h*1T 2 4  c v  T a b d dp                         (11.81)
                                                                         0T p
                                                             pż

   As pressure tends to zero at fixed temperature, the enthalpy of the substance approaches
that of its ideal gas model. Accordingly, as p tends to zero

                                       lim 3h1T, pż2  h*1T 2 4  0

                                                            pż S 0

In this limit, the following expression is obtained from Eq. 11.81 for the specific enthalpy

of a substance relative to that of its ideal gas model when both are at the same temperature:

                                     p                       0v
                    h1T, p2  h*1T 2  c v  T a b d dp                              (11.82)
                                                             0T p
                                       0

This also can be thought of as the change in enthalpy as the pressure is increased from zero
to the given pressure while temperature is held constant. Using p­v­T data only, Eq. 11.82
can be evaluated at states 1 and 2 and thus the correction term of Eq. 11.80 evaluated. Let
us consider next how this procedure can be conducted in terms of compressibility factor data
and the reduced properties TR and pR.

   The integral of Eq. 11.82 can be expressed in terms of the compressibility factor Z and
the reduced properties TR and pR as follows. Solving Z  pvRT gives

                                  v    ZRT
                                        p

On differentiation

                      0v         RZ  RT a 0Zb
                    ab
                    0T p p p 0T p

With the previous two expressions, the integrand of Eq. 11.82 becomes

          0v         ZRT  T c RZ  RT a 0Zb                       d   RT 2 a 0Z b  (11.83)
vTa b                                p p 0T p                            p 0T p
                    0T p p

Equation 11.83 can be written in terms of reduced properties as

                              0v     RTc         #  T  2  a  0Z     b
                    vTa b                              R

                            0T p          pc pR 0TR pR

Introducing this into Eq. 11.82 gives on rearrangement

                     h*1T 2  h1T, p2   T      2  pR 0Z              dpR
                           RTc                R    ab
                                                 0 0TR pR pR
526 Chapter 11 Thermodynamic Relations

                               Or, on a per mole basis, the enthalpy departure is

                                                                h1T,  p2
                                                               RTc
enthalpy departure                                 h*1T 2                   T  2   pR 0Z          dpR                 (11.84)
                                                                               R     ab
                                                                                   0 0TR pR pR

                                  The right side of Eq. 11.84 depends only on the reduced temperature TR and reduced pres-

                               sure pR. Accordingly, the quantity (h*  h)RTc, the enthalpy departure, is a function only

                               of these two reduced properties. Using a generalized equation of state giving Z as a function

                               of TR and pR, the enthalpy departure can readily be evaluated with a computer. Tabular rep-
                               resentations are also found in the literature. Alternatively, the graphical representation pro-

                               vided in Fig. A-4 can be employed.

                               EVALUATING ENTHALPY CHANGE. The change in specific enthalpy between two states
                               can be evaluated by expressing Eq. 11.80 in terms of the enthalpy departure as

                                               h2  h1  h*2  h*1       RTc   c  ah*      hb        ah*      hb      d  (11.85)
                                                                                   RTc                RTc
                                                                                             2                  1

                               The first underlined term in Eq. 11.85 represents the change in specific enthalpy between the

                               two states assuming ideal gas behavior. The second underlined term is the correction that must

                               be applied to the ideal gas value for the enthalpy change to obtain the actual value for the en-

                               thalpy change. The quantity (h*  h)RTc at state 1 would be calculated with an equation giving

                               Z(TR, pR) or obtained from tables or the generalized enthalpy departure chart, Fig. A-4, using
                               the reduced temperature TR1 and reduced pressure pR1 corresponding to the temperature T1 and

                               pressure p1 at the initial state, respectively. Similarly, (h*  h)RTc at state 2 would be evaluated

                               using TR2 and pR2. The use of Eq. 11.85 is illustrated in the next example.

E X A M P L E 1 1 . 8 Using the Generalized Enthalpy Departure Chart

Nitrogen enters a turbine operating at steady state at 100 bar and 300 K and exits at 40 bar and 245 K. Using the enthalpy
departure chart, determine the work developed, in kJ per kg of nitrogen flowing, if heat transfer with the surroundings can be
ignored. Changes in kinetic and potential energy from inlet to exit also can be neglected.

SOLUTION

Known: A turbine operating at steady state has nitrogen entering at 100 bar and 300 K and exiting at 40 bar and 245 K.
Find: Using the enthalpy departure chart, determine the work developed.
Schematic and Given Data:

                                            T

                    W­·m­·c­v                  1

            1                  2                            2
    N2                                         2s
                               p2 = 40 bar
p1 = 100 bar                   T2 = 245 K
T1 = 300 K

                                                                          s
                                                                                   Figure E11.8
                                                                                11.7 Generalized Charts for Enthalpy and Entropy 527

  Assumptions:

  1. The control volume shown on the accompanying figure operates at steady state.
  2. There is no significant heat transfer between the control volume and its surroundings.
  3. Changes in kinetic and potential energy between inlet and exit can be neglected.
  4. Equilibrium property relations apply at the inlet and exit.

  Analysis: The mass and energy rate balances reduce at steady state to give

                                             #         #                        V12     V22

                                      0      Qcv     Wcv      c h1      h2                       g1z1     z22 d
                                               #       #                             2
                                             m        m

           #
  where m is the mass flow rate. Dropping the heat transfer term by assumption 2 and the kinetic and potential energy terms
  by assumption 3 gives on rearrangement

                                                                   #

                                                              Wcv       h1        h2
                                                                #
                                                               m

  The term h1  h2 can be evaluated as follows:

                                  h1     h2       1  e h*1    h*2     RTc   c ah*      hb        ah*      hb d    f
                                                  M                              RTc                 RTc
                                                                                            1                  2

  In this expression, M is the molecular weight of nitrogen and the other terms have the same significance as in Eq. 11.85.
      With specific enthalpy values from Table A-23 at T1  300 K and T2  245 K, respectively

                                                h*1  h*2  8723  7121  1602 kJ/kmol

     The terms (h*  h) RTc at states 1 and 2 required by the above expression for h1  h2 can be determined from Fig. A-4.

  First, the reduced temperature and reduced pressure at the inlet and exit must be determined. From Tables A-1, Tc  126 K,

  pc  33.9 bar. Thus, at the inlet

                                                TR1    300    2.38,             pR1    100       2.95
                                                       126                             33.9

  At the exit

                                                        245                              40
                                                TR2  126  1.94,                 pR2  33.9  1.18

  By inspection of Fig. A-4

                                                a h*  hb  0.5,               ah*  h b  0.31
                                                    RTc 1                        RTc 2

  Substituting values

                       #

                       Wcv        1      c 1602 kJ          a8.314       kJ  #    b 1126 K2 10.5       0.312 d       50.1 kJ/kg
                         #        kg            kmol                  kmol      K
                       m
                              28
                                  kmol

   Due to inaccuracy in reading values from a graph such as Fig. A-4, we cannot expect extreme accuracy in the final cal-

      culated result.

   If the ideal gas model were used, the work would be determined as 1602 kJ/kmol, or 57.2 kJ/kg. These values are over

      14% greater than the respective values determined by including the enthalpy departure.
528 Chapter 11 Thermodynamic Relations

                   GENERALIZED ENTROPY DEPARTURE CHART

                   A generalized chart that allows changes in specific entropy to be evaluated can be developed
                   in a similar manner to the generalized enthalpy departure chart introduced above. The dif-
                   ference in specific entropy between states 1 and 2 of a gas (or liquid) can be expressed as
                   the identity

                   s1T2, p22  s1T1, p12  s*1T2, p22  s*1T1, p12                                                (11.86)
                                                5 3 s1T2, p22  s*1T2, p22 4  3 s1T1, p12  s*1T1, p12 4 6

                   where [s(T, p)  s*(T, p)] denotes the specific entropy of the substance relative to that of its
                   ideal gas model when both are at the same temperature and pressure. Equation 11.86 indi-
                   cates that the change in specific entropy between the two states equals the entropy change
                   determined using the ideal gas model plus a correction (shown underlined) that accounts for
                   the departure from ideal gas behavior. The ideal gas term can be evaluated using methods
                   introduced in Sec. 6.3.2. Let us consider next how the correction term is evaluated in terms
                   of the entropy departure.

                   DEVELOPING THE ENTROPY DEPARTURE. The following Maxwell relation gives the vari-
                   ation of entropy with pressure at fixed temperature:

                                             0s                       0v
                                           a b  a b                                                            (11.35)
                                             0p T                     0T p

                   Integrating from pressure p to pressure p at fixed temperature T gives

                                                         p 0v                                                  (11.87)

                                           s1T, p2  s1T, pż2   a b dp
                                                                        pż 0T p

                      For an ideal gas, v  RTp, so (0v0T )p  Rp. Using this in Eq. 11.87, the change in
                   specific entropy assuming ideal gas behavior is

                                            s*1T, p2  s*1T, pż2             pR                                 (11.88)
                                                                                dp
                                                                            pż p

                   Subtracting Eq. 11.88 from Eq. 11.87 gives

                    3s1T, p2  s*1T, p2 4  3s1T, pż2  s*1T, pż2 4                        p  cR       0v
                                                                                               a b
                                                                                  pż p            0T p  d  dp  (11.89)

                      Since the properties of a substance tend to merge into those of its ideal gas model as pres-
                   sure tends to zero at fixed temperature, we have

                                                         lim 3s1T, pż2  s*1T, pż2 4  0

                                                                             pż S 0

                   Thus, in the limit as p tends to zero, Eq. 11.89 becomes

                                         s1T, p2  s*1T, p2     p  cR          0v
                                                                            ab
                                                               0p           0T p           d  dp               (11.90)

                   Using p­v­T data only, Eq. 11.90 can be evaluated at states 1 and 2 and thus the correction
                   term of Eq. 11.86 evaluated.

                      Equation 11.90 can be expressed in terms of the compressibility factor Z and the reduced
                   properties TR and pR. The result, on a per mole basis, is the entropy departure

entropy departure                        s*1T, p2  s 1T, p2 h*1T 2  h1T, p2       pR 1Z  12 dpR                (11.91)
                                        R                      RTRTc                              pR
                                                                                  0
                                                                                           11.7 Generalized Charts for Enthalpy and Entropy 529

   The right side of Eq. 11.91 depends only on the reduced temperature TR and reduced pres-

sure pR. Accordingly, the quantity (s*  s )R, the entropy departure, is a function only of

these two reduced properties. As for the enthalpy departure, the entropy departure can be
evaluated with a computer using a generalized equation of state giving Z as a function of TR
and pR. Alternatively, tabular data from the literature or the graphical representation provided
in Fig. A-5 can be employed.

EVALUATING ENTROPY CHANGE. The change in specific entropy between two states can
be evaluated by expressing Eq. 11.86 in terms of the entropy departure as

           s2  s1  s*2   s*1           R c as*  sb  as*  sb d                                          (11.92)
                                                   R2                R1

The first underlined term in Eq. 11.92 represents the change in specific entropy between the

two states assuming ideal gas behavior. The second underlined term is the correction that must

be applied to the ideal gas value for entropy change to obtain the actual value for the entropy

change. The quantity (s*  s)1R, appearing in Eq. 11.92 would be calculated with an equa-

tion giving Z(TR, pR) or obtained from the generalized entropy departure chart, Fig. A-5, using
the reduced temperature TR1 and reduced pressure pR1 corresponding to the temperature T1 and

pressure p1 at the initial state, respectively. Similarly, (s*  s)2R, would be evaluated using

TR2 and pR2. The use of Eq. 11.92 is illustrated in the next example.

E X A M P L E 1 1 . 9 Using the Generalized Entropy Departure Chart

For the case of Example 11.8, determine (a) the rate of entropy production, in kJ/kg # K, and (b) the isentropic turbine
efficiency.

SOLUTION

Known: A turbine operating at steady state has nitrogen entering at 100 bar and 300 K and exiting at 40 bar and 245 K.

Find: Determine the rate of entropy production, in kJ/kg # K, and the isentropic turbine efficiency.

Schematic and Given Data: See Fig. E11.8.

Assumptions: See Example 11.8.

Analysis:

(a) At steady state, the control volume form of the entropy rate equation reduces to give

                                                     #

                                                     scv       s2    s1
                                                      #
                                                     m

The change in specific entropy required by this expression can be written as

                        s2        s1    1  e s*2     s*1    R  c a s*      sb        a s*    sb d   f
                                        M                            R                   R
                                                                               2                 1

where M is the molecular weight of nitrogen and the other terms have the same significance as in Eq. 11.92.
    The change in specific entropy s*2  s*1 can be evaluated using

                                        s*2   s*1    s°1T22        s°1T12         R  ln  p2
                                                                                         p1
530 Chapter 11 Thermodynamic Relations

With values from Table A-23

                             s*2      s*1    185.775         191.682           8.314    ln  40      1.711         kJ  #  K
                                                                                            100                kmol

   The terms (s*  s ) R at the inlet and exit can be determined from Fig. A-5. Using the reduced temperature and reduced

pressure values calculated in the solution to Example 11.8, inspection of Fig. A-5 gives

                                              as*  sb  0.21,                    as*  sb  0.14
                                                  R1                                R2

    Substituting values

                         #

                         scv         128     1        c    1.711     kJ  #  K                 kJ    K      10.14    0.212 d
                          #                kg/ kmol2              kmol             8.314 kmol #
                         m

                                     0.082    kJ
                                            kg # K

(b) The isentropic turbine efficiency is defined in Sec. 6.8 as

                                                                  ht     1W# cvm# 2
                                                                         1W# cvm# 2s

where the denominator is the work that would be developed by the turbine if the nitrogen expanded isentropically from the

specified inlet state to the specified exit pressure. Thus, it is necessary to fix the state, call it 2s, at the turbine exit for an ex-
pansion in which there is no change in specific entropy from inlet to exit. With (s2s  s1)  0 and procedures similar to those
used in part (a)

                         0       s2*s     s*1   R  c  as*      sb        as*       sb d
                                                          R                  R
                                                                   2s                  1

                         0       c s°1T2s2       s°1T12      R ln a p2 b    d      Rc   as*        sb          as*       sb d
                                                                    p1                      R                      R
                                                                                                       2s                    1

    Using values from part (a), the last equation becomes

                              0      s°1T2s2       191.682          8.314   ln  40          R  as*     sb         1.746
                                                                                100                R
                                                                                                           2s

or

                                                      s°1T2s2       R  as*      sb          182.3
                                                                           R
                                                                                    2s

The temperature T2s can be determined in an iterative procedure using s° data from Table A-23 and 1s*  s2 R from

Fig. A-5 as follows: First, a value for the temperature T2s is assumed. The corresponding value of s° can then be obtained

from Table A-23. The reduced temperature (TR)2s  T2sTc, together with pR2  1.18, allows a value for 1s*  s2 R to be

obtained from Fig. A-5. The procedure continues until agreement with the value on the right side of the above equation is

obtained. Using this procedure, T2s is found to be closely 228 K.
    With the temperature T2s known, the work that would be developed by the turbine if the nitrogen expanded isentropically

from the specified inlet state to the specified exit pressure can be evaluated from

                                  #

                              a  Wcv  b      h1       h2s
                                   #
                                  ms

                                             1   e    1h*1   h*2s2     RTc c    a  h*  h       b    a  h*  h      bd     f
                                             M
                                                                                   RTc 1                   RTc 2s

From Table A-23, h*2s  6654 kJ/kmol. From Fig. A-4 at pR2  1.18 and (TR)2s  228126  1.81

                                                               a h*  hb  0.36
                                                                   RTc 2s
                                                                      11.8 p­v­T Relations for Gas Mixtures 531

  Values for the other terms in the expression for 1W# cvm# 2s are obtained in the solution to Example 11.8. Finally

     #

  a  Wcv  b    1  38723  6654  18.314211262 10.5  0.362 4  68.66 kJ/kg
       #
     m s 28

  With the work value from Example 11.8, the turbine efficiency is

                  ht    1W# cvm# 2     50.1                           0.73 173%2
                        1W# cvm# 2s    68.66

   We cannot expect extreme accuracy when reading data from a generalized chart such as Fig. A-5, which affects the final

      calculated result.

11.8 p­v­T Relations for Gas Mixtures
Many systems of interest involve mixtures of two or more components. The principles of
thermodynamics introduced thus far are applicable to systems involving mixtures, but to ap-
ply them requires that the properties of mixtures be evaluated. Since an unlimited variety
of mixtures can be formed from a given set of pure components by varying the relative
amounts present, the properties of mixtures are available in tabular, graphical, or equation
forms only in particular cases such as air. Generally, special means are required for deter-
mining the properties of mixtures. In this section, methods for evaluating the p­v­T rela-
tions for pure components introduced in previous sections of the book are adapted to ob-
tain plausible estimates for gas mixtures. In Sec. 11.9 some general aspects of property
evaluation for multicomponent systems are introduced. The case of ideal gas mixtures is
taken up in Chap. 12.

   To evaluate the properties of a mixture requires knowledge of the composition. The com-
position can be described by giving the number of moles (kmol or lbmol) of each compo-
nent present. The total number of moles, n, is the sum of the number of moles of each of
the components

                                                                j                 (11.93)

        n  n1  n2  # # #  nj  a ni
                                                             i1

The relative amounts of the components present can be described in terms of mole fractions.
The mole fraction yi of component i is defined as

                  yi    ni                                                        (11.94)
                        n

Dividing each term of Eq. 11.93 by the total number of moles and using Eq. 11.94

                             j                                                    (11.95)

                  1  a yi
                           i1

That is, the sum of the mole fractions of all components present is equal to unity.
   Most techniques for estimating mixture properties are empirical in character and are not

derived from fundamental principles. The realm of validity of any particular technique can
be established only by comparing predicted property values with empirical data. The brief
discussion to follow is intended only to show how certain of the procedures for evaluating
the p­v­T relations of pure components introduced previously can be extended to gas
mixtures.
532 Chapter 11 Thermodynamic Relations

                        MIXTURE EQUATION OF STATE. One way the p­v­T relation for a gas mixture can be
                        estimated is by applying to the overall mixture an equation of state such as introduced in
                        Sec. 11.1. The constants appearing in the equation selected would be mixture values
                        determined with empirical combining rules developed for the equation. For example, mixture
                        values of the constants a and b for use in the van der Waals and Redlich­Kwong equations
                        would be obtained using relations of the form

                                        j       2                       j

                                        a  a a yiai12b ,  b  a a yibib     (11.96)
                                                                      i1
                                        i1

                        where ai and bi are the values of the constants for component i and yi is the mole fraction.
                        Combination rules for obtaining mixture values for the constants in other equations of state
                        also have been suggested.

                        KAY'S RULE. The principle of corresponding states method for single components intro-
                        duced in Sec. 3.4 can be extended to mixtures by regarding the mixture as if it were a single
                        pure component having critical properties calculated by one of several mixture rules. Perhaps
                        the simplest of these, requiring only the determination of a mole fraction averaged critical
                        temperature Tc and critical pressure pc, is Kay's rule

Kay's rule                                           j                j    (11.97)

                                        Tc  a yiTc,i,     pc  a yipc,i
                                                  i1                i1

                        where Tc,i, pc,i, and yi are the critical temperature, critical pressure, and mole fraction of com-
                        ponent i, respectively. Using Tc and pc, the mixture compressibility factor Z is obtained as
                        for a single pure component. The unknown quantity from among the pressure p, volume V,

                        temperature T, and total number of moles n of the gas mixture can then be obtained by solving

                                                   pV                      (11.98)
                                            Z

                                                  nRT

                        Mixture values for Tc and pc also can be used to enter the generalized enthalpy departure and
                        entropy departure charts introduced in Sec. 11.7.

                        ADDITIVE PRESSURE RULE. Additional means for estimating p­v­T relations for mixtures
                        are provided by empirical mixture rules, of which several are found in the engineering liter-
                        ature. Among these are the additive pressure and additive volume rules. According to the
                        additive pressure rule, the pressure of a gas mixture occupying volume V at temperature T
                        is expressible as a sum of pressures exerted by the individual components

additive pressure rule                  p  p1  p2  p3  # # # 4 T,V         (11.99a)

                        where the pressures p1, p2, etc. are evaluated by considering the respective components to be
                        at the volume and temperature of the mixture. These pressures would be determined using
                        tabular or graphical p­v­T data or a suitable equation of state.

                           An alternative expression of the additive pressure rule in terms of compressibility factors

                        can be obtained. Since component i is considered to be at the volume and temperature of the

                        mixture, the compressibility factor Zi for this component is Zi  piVniRT, so the pressure

                        pi is

                                            pi            ZiniRT
                                                            V
                                                                    11.8 p­v­T Relations for Gas Mixtures 533

Similarly, for the mixture

                                                  p  ZnRT
                                                          V

Substituting these expressions into Eq. 11.99a and reducing gives the following relationship
between the compressibility factors for the mixture Z and the mixture components Zi

                                       j                            (11.99b)

                            Z  a yiZi 4 T,V
                                     i1

The compressibility factors Zi are determined assuming that component i occupies the entire
volume of the mixture at the temperature T.

ADDITIVE VOLUME RULE. The underlying assumption of the additive volume rule is that
the volume V of a gas mixture at temperature T and pressure p is expressible as the sum of
volumes occupied by the individual components

                            V  V1  V2  V3  # # # 4 p,T              (11.100a) additive volume rule

where the volumes V1, V2, etc. are evaluated by considering the respective components to be
at the pressure and temperature of the mixture. These volumes would be determined from
tabular or graphical p­v­T data or a suitable equation of state.

   An alternative expression of the additive volume rule in terms of compressibility factors can

be obtained. Since component i is considered to be at the pressure and temperature of the mix-

ture, the compressibility factor Zi for this component is Zi  pViniR T, so the volume Vi is

                            Vi    ZiniRT
                                     p

Similarly, for the mixture

                            V     ZnRT
                                    p

Substituting these expressions into Eq. 11.100a and reducing gives

                                       j                            (11.100b)

                            Z  a yi Zi 4 p,T
                                     i1

The compressibility factors Zi are determined assuming that component i exists at the
temperature T and pressure p of the mixture.

   The next example illustrates alternative means for estimating the pressure of a gas mixture.

E X A M P L E 1 1 . 1 0 Estimating Mixture Pressure by Alternative Means

A mixture consisting of 0.18 kmol of methane (CH4) and 0.274 kmol of butane (C4H10) occupies a volume of 0.241 m3 at a
temperature of 238C. The experimental value for the pressure is 68.9 bar. Calculate the pressure, in bar, exerted by the mix-
ture by using (a) the ideal gas equation of state, (b) Kay's rule together with the generalized compressibility chart, (c) the van
der Waals equation, and (d) the rule of additive pressures employing the generalized compressibility chart. Compare the cal-
culated values with the known experimental value.
534 Chapter 11 Thermodynamic Relations

    SOLUTION
    Known: A mixture of two specified hydrocarbons with known molar amounts occupies a known volume at a specified
    temperature.
    Find: Determine the pressure, in bar, using four alternative methods, and compare the results with the experimental value.
    Schematic and Given Data:

T = 238°C

                       p=?

                            Assumption: As shown in the accompanying figure, the system is the mixture.

0.18 kmol CH4
0.274 kmol C4H10

 V = 0.241 m3

                             Figure E.11.10

Analysis: The total number of moles of mixture n is

                            n  0.18  0.274  0.454 kmol

Thus, the mole fractions of the methane and butane are, respectively

                            y1  0.396 and y2  0.604

The specific volume of the mixture on a molar basis is

                            v           0.241 m3                       0.531 m3

                               10.18  0.2742 kmol                      kmol

(a) Substituting values into the ideal gas equation of state

                            RT 18314 N # m/ kmol # K21511 K2 1 bar
                       p v                                             ` 105 N/m2 `
                                        10.531 m3/kmol2

                             80.01 bar

(b) To apply Kay's rule, the critical temperature and pressure for each component are required. From Table A-1, for methane

                             Tc1  191 K, pc1  46.4 bar

and for butane

                             Tc2  425 K, pc2  38.0 bar

Thus, with Eqs. 11.97

                       Tc  y1Tc1  y2Tc2  10.3962 11912  10.6042 14252  332.3 K
                       pc  y1 pc1  y2 pc2  10.3962 146.42  10.6042 138.02  41.33 bar

    Treating the mixture as a pure component having the above values for the critical temperature and pressure, the following
reduced properties are determined for the mixture:

                            TR          T                511     1.54
                                        Tc              332.3

                            vRż         vpc                   10.5312 141.332 0 105 0
                                        RTc                      183142 1332.32

                                  0.794
                                                                                     11.8 p­v­T Relations for Gas Mixtures 535

Turning to Fig. A-2, Z  0.88. The mixture pressure is then found from

                                                ZnRT RT                        1 8314 2 1 511 2
                                           p  V  Z v  0.88 10.5312 0 105 0

                                                70.4 bar

(c) Mixture values for the van der Waals constants can be obtained using Eqs. 11.96. This requires values of the van der Waals
constants for each of the two mixture components. Table A-24 gives the following values for methane:

                                                           a  m3 2                              m3
                                       a1      2.293  bar           b  ,       b1  0.0428 kmol
                                                              kmol

Similarly, from Table A-24 for butane

                                       a2      13.86  bar a   m3      2        b2    0.1162   m3
                                                                                             kmol
                                                              kmol  b,

Then, the first of Eqs. 11.96 gives a mixture value for the constant a as

     a  1y1a11 2  y2a12 222  3 0.396 12.29321 2  0.604 113.8621 2 4 2

           8.113 bar a                          m3      2

                                                kmol  b

Substituting into the second of Eqs. 11.96 gives a mixture value for the constant b

            b  y1b1  y2b2  10.3962 10.04282  10.6042 10.11622
                          m3

               0.087
                         kmol

Inserting the mixture values for a and b into the van der Waals equation together with known data

p     RT                                   a
     vb                                    v2

     18314 N # m/kmol # K2 1511 K2 1 bar                                             8.113 bar 1m3/kmol22
    10.531  0.0872 1m3/kmol2 ` 105 N/m2 `  10.531 m3/kmol22

    66.91 bar

(d) To apply the additive pressure rule with the generalized compressibility chart requires that the compressibility factor for
each component be determined assuming that the component occupies the entire volume at the mixture temperature. With this
assumption, the following reduced properties are obtained for methane

   TR1      T                              511     2.69
            Tc1                            191

   vRż 1    v1pc1                              10.241 m30.18 kmol2 146.4 bar2        ` 105 N/m2 `    3.91
            RTc1                                                                        1 bar
                                               18314 N # m / kmol # K2 1191 K2

With these reduced properties, Fig. A-2 gives Z1  1.0.
    Similarly, for butane

                                           TR2        T       511         1.2
                                                      Tc2     425

                                           vRż 2      v2 pc2    10.882 1382 0 105 0   0.95
                                                      RTc2       183142 14252

From Fig. A-2, Z2  0.8.
    The compressibility factor for the mixture determined from Eq. 11.99b is

                                         Z  y1Z1  y2Z2  10.3962 11.02  10.6042 10.82  0.88.
Accordingly, the same value for pressure as determined in part (b) using Kay's rule results: p  70.4 bar.
536 Chapter 11 Thermodynamic Relations

        In this particular example, the ideal gas equation of state gives a value for pressure that exceeds the experimental value by
    nearly 16%. Kay's rule and the rule of additive pressures give pressure values about 3% greater than the experimental value.
    The van der Waals equation with mixture values for the constants gives a pressure value about 3% less than the experimen-
    tal value.

solution  11.9 Analyzing Multicomponent Systems1

          In the preceding section we considered means for evaluating the p­v­T relation of gas mix-
          tures by extending methods developed for pure components. The current section is devoted
          to the development of some general aspects of the properties of systems with two or more
          components. Primary emphasis is on the case of gas mixtures, but the methods developed
          also apply to solutions. When liquids and solids are under consideration, the term solution
          is sometimes used in place of mixture. The present discussion is limited to nonreacting mix-
          tures or solutions in a single phase. The effects of chemical reactions and equilibrium be-
          tween different phases are taken up in Chaps. 13 and 14.

              To describe multicomponent systems, composition must be included in our thermody-
          namic relations. This leads to the definition and development of several new concepts, in-
          cluding the partial molal property, the chemical potential, and the fugacity.

           11.9.1 Partial Molal Properties

          In the present discussion we introduce the concept of a partial molal property and illustrate
          its use. This concept plays an important role in subsequent discussions of multicomponent
          systems.

          DEFINING PARTIAL MOLAL PROPERTIES. Any extensive thermodynamic property X of
          a single-phase, single-component system is a function of two independent intensive prop-
          erties and the size of the system. Selecting temperature and pressure as the independent
          properties and the number of moles n as the measure of size, we have X  X(T, p, n). For
          a single-phase, multicomponent system, the extensive property X must then be a function
          of temperature, pressure, and the number of moles of each component present, X  X(T, p,
          n1, n2, . . . , nj).

             If each mole number is increased by a factor , the size of the system increases by the
          same factor, and so does the value of the extensive property X. That is

                                  aX1T, p, n1, n2, . . . , nj2  X1T, p, an1, an2, . . . , anj2

          Differentiating with respect to  while holding temperature, pressure, and the mole numbers
          fixed and using the chain rule on the right side gives

          X    0X           0X     n2    #  #    #                                    0X
             0 1an12 n1   0 1an22                                                   0 1anj2 nj

          This equation holds for all values of . In particular, it holds for   1. Setting   1

                          j 0X
             X                ni      b                                                         (11.101)
                          a        0ni T, p, nl

                          i1

          where the subscript nl denotes that all n's except ni are held fixed during differentiation.

          1This section may be deferred until Secs. 12.1­12.4 have been studied.
                                                                  11.9 Analyzing Multicomponent Systems 537

The partial molal property Xi is by definition

                                      0X
                            Xi           b                                      (11.102) partial molal property
                                      0ni T, p, nl

The partial molal property Xi is a property of the mixture and not simply a property of
component i, for Xi depends in general on temperature, pressure, and mixture composition:
Xi(T, p, n1, n2, . . . , nj). Partial molal properties are intensive properties of the mixture.

   Introducing Eq. 11.102, Eq. 11.101 becomes

                                        j                                       (11.103)

                            X  a niXi
                                     i1

This equation shows that the extensive property X can be expressed as a weighted sum of
the partial molal properties Xi.

   Selecting the extensive property X in Eq. 11.103 to be volume, internal energy, enthalpy,
and entropy, respectively, gives

            j                  j                            j                j  (11.104)

V  a niVi,         U  a niUi,                   H  a niHi,        S  a niSi
         i1                  i1                           i1               i1

where Vi, Ui, Hi, Si denote the partial molal volume, internal energy, enthalpy, and entropy.
Similar expressions can be written for the Gibbs function G and the Helmholtz function .
Moreover, the relations between these extensive properties: H  U  pV, G  H  TS,  
U  TS can be differentiated with respect to ni while holding temperature, pressure, and the
remaining n's constant to produce corresponding relations among partial molal properties:
Hi  Ui  pVi, Gi  Hi  TSi, °i  Ui  TSi, where Gi and °i are the partial molal Gibbs
function and Helmholtz function, respectively. Several additional relations involving partial mo-

lal properties are developed later in this section.

EVALUATING PARTIAL MOLAL PROPERTIES. Partial molal properties can be evaluated by
several methods, including the following:

 If the property X can be measured, Xi can be found by extrapolating a plot giving
   (Xni)T, p, nl versus ni. That is

                        0X                          ˘X
               Xi    a     b             lim     a      b
                        0ni T, p, nl                ˘ni T, p, nl
                                        ˘ni S 0

 If an expression for X in terms of its independent variables is known, Xi can be evalu-
   ated by differentiation. The derivative can be determined analytically if the function is
   expressed analytically or found numerically if the function is in tabular form.

 When suitable data are available, a simple graphical procedure known as the method of             method of intercepts
   intercepts can be used to evaluate partial molal properties. In principle, the method can
   be applied for any extensive property. To introduce this method, let us consider the vol-
   ume of a system consisting of two components, A and B. For this system, Eq. 11.103
   takes the form

                                            V  nAVA  nBVB

where VA and VB are the partial molal volumes of A and B, respectively. Dividing by the
number of moles of mixture n

                        V       yAVA            yBVB
                        n
538 Chapter 11 Thermodynamic Relations

    ­Vn­ T and p constant                            vB(T, p)
          ­Vn­ as a function of yB

                                                     VB(T, p, yB)

    vA(T, p)                                Tangent
VA(T, p, yB)                                  line

              0                         yB           1.0            Figure 11.5 Illustration of the evaluation
                                                                   of partial molal volumes by the method of in-
    (pure A) Mole fraction of B (pure B)                           tercepts.

    where yA and yB denote the mole fractions of A and B, respectively. Since yA  yB  1,
    this becomes

                            V
                            n  11  yB2VA  yBVB  VA  yB1VB  VA2

    This equation provides the basis for the method of intercepts. For example, refer to
    Fig. 11.5, in which Vn is plotted as a function of yB at constant T and p. At a speci-
    fied value for yB, a tangent to the curve is shown on the figure. When extrapolated,
    the tangent line intersects the axis on the left at VA and the axis on the right at VB.
    These values for the partial molal volumes correspond to the particular specifications
    for T, p, and yB. At fixed temperature and pressure, VA and VB vary with yB and are
    not equal to the molar specific volumes of pure A and pure B, denoted on the figure
    as vA and vB, respectively. The values of vA and vB are fixed by temperature and
    pressure only.

EXTENSIVE PROPERTY CHANGES ON MIXING. Let us conclude the present discussion
by evaluating the change in volume on mixing of pure components at the same temperature
and pressure, a result for which an application is given later in the section. The total volume
of the pure components before mixing is

                                                                               j

                                                     Vcomponents  a nivi
                                                                             i1

where vi is the molar specific volume of pure component i. The volume of the mixture is

                                                                                            j

                                             Vmixture  a niVi
                                                                                         i1

where Vi is the partial molal volume of component i in the mixture. The volume change on
mixing is

                                                                                  j  j

                                        ˘Vmixing  Vmixture  Vcomponents  a niVi  a nivi
                                                                   i1                i1

or

                                                                            j            (11.105)

                                                     ˘Vmixing  a ni1Vi  vi2
                                                                          i1
                                                                                        11.9 Analyzing Multicomponent Systems 539

Similar results can be obtained for other extensive properties, for example,

                                                      j                                 (11.106)

                              ˘Umixing  a ni 1Ui  ui2
                                                    i1
                                                      j

                              ˘Hmixing  a ni 1Hi  hi2
                                                    i1
                                                       j
                               ˘Smixing  a ni 1Si  si2
                                                    i1

In Eqs. 11.106, ui, hi, and si denote the molar internal energy, enthalpy, and entropy
of pure component i. The symbols Ui, Hi, and Si denote the respective partial molal
properties.

 11.9.2 Chemical Potential

Of the partial molal properties, the partial molal Gibbs function is particularly useful in de-
scribing the behavior of mixtures and solutions. This quantity plays a central role in the cri-
teria for both chemical and phase equilibrium (Chap. 14). Because of its importance in the
study of multicomponent systems, the partial molal Gibbs function of component i is given
a special name and symbol. It is called the chemical potential of component i and sym-
bolized by i

                                               0G                                       (11.107) chemical potential
                                         Gi       b
                                   mi          0ni T, p, nl

Like temperature and pressure, the chemical potential i is an intensive property.
   Applying Eq. 11.103 together with Eq. 11.107, the following expression can be written:

                                                   j                                    (11.108)

                                       G  a ni mi
                                                 i1

Expressions for the internal energy, enthalpy, and Helmholtz function can be obtained
from Eq. 11.108, using the definitions H  U  pV, G  H  TS, and   U  TS.
They are

                                                                  j                     (11.109)

                              U  TS  pV  a ni mi
                                                                i1
                                                      j

                              H  TS  a ni mi
                                                    i1
                                                           j

                              °  pV  a ni mi
                                                        i1

Other useful relations can be obtained as well. Forming the differential of G(T, p,

n1, n2, . . . , nj)

                          0G       dp    0G  b               j 0G
                     dG      b                       dT    aa           b          dni  (11.110)
                          0p T, n        0T    p, n                  0ni T, p, nl
                                                           i1

The subscripts n in the first two terms indicate that all n's are held fixed during differentia-
tion. Since this implies fixed composition, it follows from Eqs. 11.30 and 11.31 that

                     V  a 0Gb            and S  a 0Gb                                   (11.111)
                              0p T, n                                0T p, n
540 Chapter 11 Thermodynamic Relations

                      With Eqs. 11.107 and 11.111, Eq. 11.110 becomes

                                                                                          j                   (11.112)

                                             dG  V dp  S dT  a mi dni
                                                                                        i1

                      which for a multicomponent system is the counterpart of Eq. 11.23.
                         Another expression for dG is obtained by forming the differential of Eq. 11.108. That is

                                                       j                  j

                                                 dG  a ni dmi  a mi dni
                                                       i1                 i1

                      Combining this equation with Eq. 11.112 gives the Gibbs­Duhem equation

Gibbs­Duhem equation                                     j                                                    (11.113)

                                                       a ni dmi  V dp  S dT

                                                       i1

                       11.9.3 Fundamental Thermodynamic Functions for
                                        Multicomponent Systems

                      A fundamental thermodynamic function provides a complete description of the thermody-

                      namic state of a system. In principle, all properties of interest can be determined from such

                      a function by differentiation and/or combination. Reviewing the developments of Sec. 11.9.2,

                      we see that a function G(T, p, n1, n2, . . . , nj) is a fundamental thermodynamic function for
                      a multicomponent system.

                         Functions of the form U(S, V, n1, n2, . . . , nj), H(S, p, n1, n2, . . . , nj), and (T, V,
                      n1, n2, . . . , nj) also can serve as fundamental thermodynamic functions for multicomponent
                      systems. To demonstrate this, first form the differential of each of Eqs. 11.109 and use the

                      Gibbs­Duhem equation, Eq. 11.113, to reduce the resultant expressions to obtain

                                                                                            j                 (11.114a)
                                                                                                              (11.114b)
                                              dU  T dS  p dV  a mi dni                                        (11.114c)
                                                                                          i1
                                                                                            j

                                              dH  T dS  V dp  a mi dni
                                                                                          i1
                                                                                              j

                                             d°  p dV  S dT  a mi dni
                                                                                            i1

                      For multicomponent systems, these are the counterparts of Eqs. 11.18, 11.19, and 11.22,

                      respectively.

                      The differential of U(S, V, n1, n2, . . . , nj) is

                                             0U           0U                  j 0U
                                        dU      b dS          b       dV          a     b            dni
                                             0S V, n      0V                  a      0ni S,V, nl
                                                                S, n
                                                                              i1

                      Comparing this expression term by term with Eq. 11.114a, we have

                                              0U               0U                                0U
                                        T b ,          p  b ,                                       b         (11.115a)
                                                                              mi                 0ni S,V, nl
                                              0S V, n          0V S, n

                      That is, the temperature, pressure, and chemical potentials can be obtained by differentiation

                      of U(S, V, n1, n2, . . . , nj). The first two of Eqs. 11.115a are the counterparts of Eqs. 11.24
                      and 11.25.

                         A similar procedure using a function of the form H(S, p, n1, n2, . . . , nj) together with
                      Eq. 11.114b gives

                                              0H             0H                              0H
                                        T b ,          V b ,                                    b             (11.115b)
                                                                              mi             0ni S, p, nl
                                              0S p, n        0p S, n
                                                                     11.9 Analyzing Multicomponent Systems 541

where the first two of these are the counterparts of Eqs. 11.26 and 11.27. Finally, with
(S, V, n1, n2, . . . , nj) and Eq. 11.114c

        0°                        0°               mi   0°
p  b ,                    S  b ,                            b
                                                        0ni T,V, nl               (11.115c)
         0V T, n                   0T V, n

The first two of these are the counterparts of Eqs. 11.28 and 11.29. With each choice of fun-
damental function, the remaining extensive properties can be found by combination using
the definitions H  U  pV, G  H  TS,   U  TS.

   The foregoing discussion of fundamental thermodynamic functions has led to several prop-
erty relations for multicomponent systems that correspond to relations obtained previously.
In addition, counterparts of the Maxwell relations can be obtained by equating mixed sec-
ond partial derivatives. For example, the first two terms on the right of Eq. 11.112 give

                          0V           0S
                              b  b                                                (11.116)
                          0T p, n      0p T, n

which corresponds to Eq. 11.35. Numerous relationships involving chemical potentials can
be derived similarly by equating mixed second partial derivatives. An important example
from Eq. 11.112 is

                                            0mi b  0V b
                                             0p T, n 0ni T, p, nl
Recognizing the right side of this equation as the partial molal volume, we have

                              0mi b      Vi                                       (11.117)
                              0p T, n

This relationship is applied later in the section.
   The present discussion concludes by listing four different expressions derived above for

the chemical potential in terms of other properties. In the order obtained, they are

     0G                   0U             0H             0°
mi      b                    b              b               b
     0ni T, p, nl         0ni S,V, nl    0ni S, p, nl   0ni T,V, nl               (11.118)

Only the first of these partial derivatives is a partial molal property, however, for the term
partial molal applies only to partial derivatives where the independent variables are temper-
ature, pressure, and the number of moles of each component present.

 11.9.4 Fugacity

The chemical potential plays an important role in describing multicomponent systems. In
some instances, however, it is more convenient to work in terms of a related property, the
fugacity. The fugacity is introduced in the present discussion.

SINGLE-COMPONENT SYSTEMS

Let us begin by taking up the case of a system consisting of a single component. For this
case, Eq. 11.108 reduces to give

         G  nm                or         m      G    g
                                                n
542 Chapter 11 Thermodynamic Relations

          That is, for a pure component the chemical potential equals the Gibbs function per mole.
          With this equation, Eq. 11.30 written on a per mole basis becomes

                                        0mb  v                                           (11.119)
                                        0p T

          For the special case of an ideal gas, v  RTp, and Eq. 11.119 assumes the form

                                        0m*b  RT
                                        0p T p

          where the asterisk denotes ideal gas. Integrating at constant temperature

                                        m*  RT ln p  C 1T 2                              (11.120)

          where C(T) is a function of integration. Since the pressure p can take on values from zero
          to plus infinity, the ln p term of this expression, and thus the chemical potential, has an in-
          convenient range of values from minus infinity to plus infinity. Equation 11.120 also shows
          that the chemical potential can be determined only to within an arbitrary constant.

fugacity  INTRODUCING FUGACITY. Because of the above considerations, it is advantageous for
          many types of thermodynamic analyses to use fugacity in place of the chemical potential,
          for it is a well-behaved function that can be more conveniently evaluated. We introduce the
          fugacity f by the expression

                                        m  RT ln f  C 1T 2                               (11.121)

          Comparing Eq. 11.121 with Eq. 11.120, the fugacity is seen to play the same role in the gen-
          eral case as pressure plays in the ideal gas case. Fugacity has the same units as pressure.

             Substituting Eq. 11.121 into Eq. 11.119 gives

                                              0 ln f                                     (11.122)
                                        RT a b  v

                                               0p T

          Integration of Eq. 11.122 while holding temperature constant can determine the fugacity only
          to within a constant term. However, since ideal gas behavior is approached as pressure tends
          to zero, the constant term can be fixed by requiring that the fugacity of a pure component
          equals the pressure in the limit of zero pressure. That is

                                             f                                           (11.123)
                                        lim  1
                                        pS0 p

          Equations 11.122 and 11.123 then completely determine the fugacity function.

          EVALUATING FUGACITY. Let us consider next how the fugacity can be evaluated. With

          Z  pv RT, Eq. 11.122 becomes

                                                            0 ln f RTZ
                                                      RT a b 

                                                             0p T p
          or

                                         0 ln f  Z
                                        ab
                                        0p T p
                                                                                 11.9 Analyzing Multicomponent Systems 543

Subtracting 1p from both sides and integrating from pressure p to pressure p at fixed tem-
perature T

                    3 ln  f    ln    p  4  p          p   1Z  12 d ln p
                                           pż

                                                      pż

or

                                f p               p

                          c ln d  1Z  12 d ln p
                               p pż
                                                  pż

Taking the limit as p tends to zero and applying Eq. 11.123 results in

                                 f             p

                             ln  1Z  12 d ln p
                               p
                                               0

When expressed in terms of the reduced pressure, pR  ppc, the above equation is

                               f           pR

                          ln p  0 1Z  12 d ln pR                                               (11.124)

Since the compressibility factor Z depends on the reduced temperature TR and reduced pres-
sure pR, it follows that the right side of Eq. 11.124 depends on these properties only. Ac-
cordingly, the quantity ln fp is a function only of these two reduced properties. Using a gen-
eralized equation of state giving Z as a function of TR and pR, ln fp can readily be evaluated
with a computer. Tabular representations are also found in the literature. Alternatively, the

graphical representation presented in Fig. A-6 can be employed.

    for example. . . to illustrate the use of Fig. A-6, consider two states of water vapor
at the same temperature, 400C. At state 1 the pressure is 200 bar, and at state 2 the pres-
sure is 240 bar. The change in the chemical potential between these states can be determined
using Eq. 11.121 as

                m2        m1      RT       ln     f2      RT  ln a f2  p2  p1 b
                                                  f1              p2   p1  f1

Using the critical temperature and pressure of water from Table A-1, at state 1 pR1  0.91,
TR1  1.04, and at state 2 pR2  1.09, TR2  1.04. By inspection of Fig. A-6, f1p1  0.755
and f2p2  0.7. Inserting values in the above equation

    m2    m1    18.314 2 1 673.15 2  ln c 10.72 a 240 b a 1 b d                  597  kJ/kmol
                                                 200 0.755

For a pure component, the chemical potential equals the Gibbs function per mole,
g  h  T s. Since the temperature is the same at states 1 and 2, the change in the chemi-
cal potential can be expressed as m2  m1  h2  h1  T 1s2  s12. Using steam table data,
the value obtained with this expression is 597 kJ/kmol, which agrees with the value deter-

mined from the generalized fugacity coefficient chart. 

MULTICOMPONENT SYSTEMS

The fugacity of a component i in a mixture can be defined by a procedure that parallels the
definition for a pure component. For a pure component, the development begins with
Eq. 11.119, and the fugacity is introduced by Eq. 11.121. These are then used to write the
pair of equations, Eqs. 11.122 and 11.123, from which the fugacity can be evaluated. For a
544 Chapter 11 Thermodynamic Relations

                       mixture, the development begins with Eq. 11.117, the counterpart of Eq. 11.119, and the
                       fugacity f i of component i is introduced by

                                         mi  RT ln fi  Ci 1T 2                       (11.125)

                       which parallels Eq. 11.121. The pair of equations that allow the fugacity of a mixture
                       component, f i, to be evaluated are

                                                 a  0   ln  fib        
                                                        0p
                                             RT                  T, n        Vi      (11.126a)
                                                                                     (11.126b)
fugacity of a mixture                            lim a f i b  1
component                                        pS0 yip

                       The symbol f i denotes the fugacity of component i in the mixture and should be carefully
                       distinguished in the presentation to follow from fi, which denotes the fugacity of pure i.

                       DISCUSSION. Referring to Eq. 11.126b, note that in the ideal gas limit the fugacity f i is
                       not required to equal the pressure p as for the case of a pure component, but to equal the
                       quantity yi p. To see that this is the appropriate limiting quantity, consider a system consist-
                       ing of a mixture of gases occupying a volume V at pressure p and temperature T. If the over-
                       all mixture behaves as an ideal gas, we can write

                                                    p  nRT                           (11.127)
                                                           V

                       where n is the total number of moles of mixture. Recalling from Sec. 3.5 that an ideal gas can
                       be regarded as composed of molecules that exert negligible forces on one another and whose
                       volume is negligible relative to the total volume, we can think of each component i as be-
                       having as if it were an ideal gas alone at the temperature T and volume V. Thus, the pressure
                       exerted by component i would not be the mixture pressure p but the pressure pi given by

                                                    pi      niRT                     (11.128)
                                                             V

                       where ni is the number of moles of component i. Dividing Eq. 11.128 by Eq. 11.127

                                         pi      ni RTV                ni        yi
                                         p       nRTV                  n

                       On rearrangement

                                                    pi  yi p                         (11.129)

                       Accordingly, the quantity yi p appearing in Eq. 11.126b corresponds to the pressure pi.
                          Summing both sides of Eq. 11.129, we obtain

                                         j              j                    j

                                         a pi  a yi p  p a yi
                                         i1            i1                    i1

                       Or, since the sum of the mole fractions equals unity

                                                               j                     (11.130)

                                                    p  a pi
                                                             i1

                       In words, Eq. 11.130 states that the sum of the pressures pi equals the mixture pressure. This
                       gives rise to the designation partial pressure for pi. With this background, we now see that
                                                                                 11.9 Analyzing Multicomponent Systems 545

Eq. 11.126b requires the fugacity of component i to approach the partial pressure of com-
ponent i as pressure p tends to zero. Comparing Eqs. 11.130 and 11.99a, we also see that
the additive pressure rule is exact for ideal gas mixtures. This special case is considered fur-
ther in Sec. 12.2 under the heading Dalton model.

EVALUATING FUGACITY IN A MIXTURE. Let us consider next how the fugacity of com-
ponent i in a mixture can be expressed in terms of quantities that can be evaluated. For a
pure component i, Eq. 11.122 gives

                                      a     0  ln  fi b     
                                               0p
                                 RT                    T      vi                 (11.131)

where vi is the molar specific volume of pure i. Subtracting Eq. 11.131 from Eq. 11.126a

                                 0  ln 1 fifi2

                         RT  c        0p           d          Vi    vi           (11.132)

                                                      T, n

Integrating from pressure pż to pressure p at fixed temperature and mixture composition

                          RT c ln a fi b d p              p
                                   fi pż
                                                           1Vi  vi2 dp

                                                         pż

In the limit as pż tends to zero, this becomes

     RT c ln a fi b  lim ln a fi b d fi              fi            p
                                    pżS 0
                                                                    1Vi  vi2 dp

                                                                  0

Since fi S pż and fi S yipż as pressure pż tends to zero

                         lim ln  a    fi b  S   ln a yipż b         ln yi
                                      fi             pż
                         pż S 0

Therefore, we can write

                         c ln a fi b                         p
                               fi
                          RT                                  1Vi  vi2 dp
                                            ln yi d   
                                                            0

or

                          RT ln a fi b                 p                         (11.133)
                                  yi fi
                                                        1Vi  vi2 dp

                                                      0

in which fi is the fugacity of component i at pressure p in a mixture of given composition
at a given temperature, and fi is the fugacity of pure i at the same temperature and pressure.
Equation 11.133 expresses the relation between fi and fi in terms of the difference between
Vi and vi, a measurable quantity.

 11.9.5 Ideal Solution

The task of evaluating the fugacities of the components in a mixture is considerably simpli-
fied when the mixture can be modeled as an ideal solution. An ideal solution is a mixture ideal solution
for which

                         fi  yi fi 1ideal solution2                              (11.134) Lewis­Randall rule
546 Chapter 11 Thermodynamic Relations

Equation 11.134, known as the Lewis­Randall rule, states that the fugacity of each compo-
nent in an ideal solution is equal to the product of its mole fraction and the fugacity of the
pure component at the same temperature, pressure, and state of aggregation (gas, liquid, or
solid) as the mixture. Many gaseous mixtures at low to moderate pressures are adequately
modeled by the Lewis­Randall rule. The ideal gas mixtures considered in Chap. 12 are an
important special class of such mixtures. Some liquid solutions also can be modeled with
the Lewis­Randall rule.

   As consequences of the definition of an ideal solution, the following characteristics are
exhibited:

 Introducing Eq. 11.134 into Eq. 11.132, the left side vanishes, giving Vi  vi  0, or

                                                    Vi  vi                         (11.135)

Thus, the partial molal volume of each component in an ideal solution is equal to the
molar specific volume of the corresponding pure component at the same temperature
and pressure. When Eq. 11.135 is introduced in Eq. 11.105, it can be concluded that
there is no volume change on mixing pure components to form an ideal solution.

   With Eq. 11.135, the volume of an ideal solution is

                                            j   j   j

                                        V  a niVi  a nivi  a Vi  1ideal solution2  (11.136)

                                            i1  i1  i1

where Vi is the volume that pure component i would occupy when at the temperature
and pressure of the mixture. Comparing Eqs. 11.136 and 11.100a, the additive volume
rule is seen to be exact for ideal solutions.

 It also can be shown that the partial molal internal energy of each component in an
   ideal solution is equal to the molar internal energy of the corresponding pure compo-
   nent at the same temperature and pressure. A similar result applies for enthalpy. In
   symbols

                                                Ui  ui, Hi  hi                     (11.137)

With these expressions, it can be concluded from Eqs. 11.106 that there is no change in
internal energy or enthalpy on mixing pure components to form an ideal solution.

   With Eqs. 11.137, the internal energy and enthalpy of an ideal solution are

                                        j               j

                                        U  a niui and H  a nihi 1ideal solution2   (11.138)

                                        i1             i1

where ui and hi denote, respectively, the molar internal energy and enthalpy of pure
component i at the temperature and pressure of the mixture.

   Although there is no change in V, U, or H on mixing pure components to form an ideal
solution, we expect an entropy increase to result from the adiabatic mixing of different pure
components because such a process is irreversible: The separation of the mixture into the
pure components would never occur spontaneously. The entropy change on adiabatic mix-
ing is considered further for the special case of ideal gas mixtures in Sec. 12.4.

   The Lewis­Randall rule requires that the fugacity of mixture component i be evaluated
in terms of the fugacity of pure component i at the same temperature and pressure as the
mixture and in the same state of aggregation. For example, if the mixture were a gas at
T, p, then fi would be determined for pure i at T, p and as a gas. However, at certain tem-
peratures and pressures of interest a component of a gaseous mixture may, as a pure sub-
stance, be a liquid or solid. An example is an air­water vapor mixture at 20C (68F) and
1 atm. At this temperature and pressure, water exists not as a vapor but as a liquid. Although
not considered here, means have been developed that allow the ideal solution model to be
useful in such cases.
                                                                                                       11.9 Analyzing Multicomponent Systems 547

 11.9.6 Chemical Potential for Ideal Solutions

The discussion of multicomponent systems concludes with the introduction of expressions for
evaluating the chemical potential for ideal solutions used in subsequent sections of the book.

   Consider a reference state where component i of a multicomponent system is pure at the
temperature T of the system and a reference-state pressure pref. The difference in the chem-
ical potential of i between a specified state of the multicomponent system and the reference
state is obtained with Eq. 11.125 as

                         mi    m°i       RT     ln  fi                       (11.139)
                                                    f i°

where the superscript ° denotes property values at the reference state. The fugacity ratio appearing
in the logarithmic term is known as the activity, ai, of component i in the mixture. That is

                                   ai    fi                                  (11.140) activity
                                         f i°

For subsequent applications, it suffices to consider the case of gaseous mixtures. For gaseous
mixtures, pref is specified as 1 atm, so m°i and f i° in Eq. 11.140 are, respectively, the chem-
ical potential and fugacity of pure i at temperature T and 1 atm.

   Since the chemical potential of a pure component equals the Gibbs function per mole,
Eq. 11.139 can be written as

                         mi  gi° RT ln ai                                    (11.141)

where g°i is the Gibbs function per mole of pure component i evaluated at temperature T and
1 atm: g°i  gi(T, 1 atm).

   For an ideal solution, the Lewis­Randall rule applies and the activity is

                                   ai    yi fi                               (11.142)
                                         f i°

where fi is the fugacity of pure component i at temperature T and pressure p. Introducing
Eq. 11.142 into Eq. 11.141

                         mi    g°i       RT     ln  yi fi
                                                    f i°

or

    mi    g °i   RT  ln  c a fi b  a pref b  yip d         1ideal solution2  (11.143)
                            p        f i°    pref

In principle, the ratios of fugacity to pressure shown underlined in this equation can be eval-

uated from Eq. 11.124 or the generalized fugacity chart, Fig. A-6, developed from it. If com-

ponent i behaves as an ideal gas at both T, p and T, pref, fip  f °i pref  1, and Eq. 11.143

reduces to

          mi         g i°    RT    ln  yi p         1ideal gas2              (11.144)
                                       pref
548 Chapter 11 Thermodynamic Relations

Chapter Summary and Study Guide

In this chapter, we introduce thermodynamic relations that al-  the chapter and understand each of the related concepts. The
low u, h, and s as well as other properties of simple com-      subset of key concepts listed below is particularly important.
pressible systems to be evaluated using property data that are  Additionally, for systems involving a single species you
more readily measured. The emphasis is on systems involv-       should be able to
ing a single chemical species such as water or a mixture such
as air. An introduction to general property relations for mix-   calculate p­v­T data using equations of state such
tures and solutions is also included.                              as the Redlich­Kwong and Benedict­Webb­Rubin
                                                                   equations.
   Equations of state relating p, v, and T are considered, in-
cluding the virial equation and examples of two-constant and     use the 16 property relations summarized in Table 11.1
multiconstant equations. Several important property rela-          and explain how the relations are obtained.
tions based on the mathematical characteristics of exact dif-
ferentials are developed, including the Maxwell relations.       evaluate s, u, and h, using the Clapeyron equation
The concept of a fundamental thermodynamic function is             when considering phase change, and using equations of
discussed. Means for evaluating changes in specific internal       state and specific heat relations when considering single
energy, enthalpy, and entropy are developed and applied to         phases.
phase change and to single-phase processes. Property
relations are introduced involving the volume expansivity,       use the property relations introduced in Sec. 11.5 such as
isothermal and isentropic compressibilities, velocity of           those involving the specific heats, the volume expansiv-
sound, specific heats and specific heat ratio, and the             ity, and the Joule­Thomson coefficient.
Joule­Thomson coefficient.
                                                                 explain how tables of thermodynamic properties, such as
   Additionally, we describe how tables of thermodynamic           Tables A-2 through A-18, are constructed.
properties are constructed using the property relations and
methods developed in this chapter. Such procedures also pro-     use the generalized enthalpy and entropy departure
vide the basis for data retrieval by computer software. Also       charts, Figs. A-4 and A-5, to evaluate h and s.
described are means for using the generalized enthalpy and
entropy departure charts and the generalized fugacity coeffi-   For a gas mixture of known composition, you should be
cient chart to evaluate enthalpy, entropy, and fugacity,        able to
respectively.
                                                                 apply the methods introduced in Sec. 11.8 for relating
   We also consider p­v­T relations for gas mixtures of            pressure, specific volume, and temperature--Kay's rule,
known composition, including Kay's rule. The chapter con-          for example.
cludes with a discussion of property relations for multi-
component systems, including partial molal properties,          For multicomponent systems, you should be able to
chemical potential, fugacity, and activity. Ideal solutions
and the Lewis­Randall rule are introduced as a part of that      evaluate extensive properties in terms of the respective
presentation.                                                      partial molal properties.

   The following checklist provides a study guide for this       evaluate partial molal volumes using the method of
chapter. When your study of the text and end-of-chapter ex-        intercepts.
ercises has been completed you should be able to write out
the meanings of the terms listed in the margins throughout       evaluate fugacity using data from the generalized fugac-
                                                                   ity coefficient chart, Fig. A-6.

                                                                 apply the ideal solution model.

Key Engineering Concepts

equation of                Gibbs function p. 498                Joule-Thomson              method of
   state p. 487            Maxwell relations p. 499                coefficient p. 518         intercepts p. 537
                           fundamental
exact differential p. 494                                       enthalpy and entropy       chemical potential p. 539
test for exactness p. 494     function p. 503                      departures p. 526, 528  fugacity p. 542
Helmholtz                  Clapeyron                                                       Lewis­Randall rule p. 545
                                                                Kay's rule p. 532
   function p. 498           equation p. 505
                                                                     Problems: Developing Engineering Skills 549

Exercises: Things Engineers Think About

1. What is an advantage of using the Redlich­Kwong equation          9. Can you devise a way to determine the specific heat cp of a
of state in the generalized form given by Eq. 11.9 instead of        gas by direct measurement? Indirectly, using other measured
Eq. 11.7? A disadvantage?                                            data?

2. To determine the specific volume of superheated water vapor       10. For an ideal gas, what is the value of the Joule­Thomson
at a known pressure and temperature, when would you use each         coefficient?
of the following: the steam tables, the generalized compressibility
chart, an equation of state, the ideal gas model?                    11. At what states is the entropy departure negligible? The
                                                                     fugacity coefficient, fp, closely equal to unity?
3. If the function p  p(T, v) is an equation of state, is (0p0T)v
a property? What are the independent variables of (0p0T )v?          12. In Eq. 11.107, what do the subscripts T, p, and nl signify?
4. In the expression (0u0T )v, what does the subscript v signify?    What does i denote?

5. Explain how a Mollier diagram provides a graphical repre-         13. How does Eq. 11.108 reduce for a system consisting of a
sentation of the fundamental function h(s, p).                       pure substance? Repeat for an ideal gas mixture.

6. How is the Clapeyron equation used?                               14. If two different liquids of known volumes are mixed, is the
                                                                     final volume necessarily equal to the sum of the original
7. For a gas whose equation of state is pv  RT, are the specific     volumes?
heats cp and cv necessarily functions of temperature alone?
                                                                     15. For a binary solution at temperature T and pressure p, how
8. Referring to the p­T diagram for water, explain why ice melts     would you determine the specific heat cp? Repeat for an ideal
under the blade of an ice skate.                                     solution and for an ideal gas mixture.

Problems: Developing Engineering Skills

Using Equations of State                                                methane should not exceed 12 MPa. Check the pressure using
                                                                        the
11.1 The pressure within a 23.3-m3 tank should not exceed 105
   bar. Check the pressure within the tank if filled with 1000 kg       (a) ideal gas equation of state.
   of water vapor maintained at 360C using the                          (b) Redlich­Kwong equation.
                                                                        (c) Benedict­Webb­Rubin equation.
   (a) ideal gas equation of state.
   (b) van der Waals equation.                                       11.5 Methane gas at 100 atm and 18C is stored in a 10-m3
   (c) Redlich­Kwong equation.                                          tank. Determine the mass of methane contained in the tank, in
   (d) compressibility chart.                                           kg, using the
   (e) steam tables.
                                                                        (a) ideal gas equation of state.
11.2 Estimate the pressure of water vapor at a temperature of           (b) van der Waals equation.
   500C and a density of 24 kg/m3 using the                             (c) Benedict­Webb­Rubin equation.

   (a) steam tables.                                                 11.6 Using the Benedict­Webb­Rubin equation of state, deter-
   (b) compressibility chart.                                           mine the volume, in m3 occupied by 165 kg of methane at a
   (c) Redlich­Kwong equation.                                          pressure of 200 atm and temperature of 400 K. Compare with
   (d) van der Waals equation.                                          the results obtained using the ideal gas equation of state and
   (e) ideal gas equation of state.                                     the generalized compressibility chart.

11.3 Determine the specific volume of water vapor at 20 MPa          11.7 A rigid tank contains 1 kg of oxygen (O2) at p1  40 bar,
   and 400C, in m3/kg, using the                                        T1  180 K. The gas is cooled until the temperature drops to
                                                                        150 K. Determine the volume of the tank, in m3, and the final
   (a) steam tables.                                                    pressure, in bar, using the
   (b) compressibility chart.
   (c) Redlich­Kwong equation.                                          (a) ideal gas equation of state.
   (d) van der Waal equation.                                           (b) Redlich­Kwong equation.
   (e) ideal gas equation of state.                                     (c) compressibility chart.
11.4 A vessel whose volume is 1 m3 contains 4 kmol of methane
   at 100C. Owing to safety requirements, the pressure of the        11.8 Water vapor initially at 240C, 1 MPa expands in a piston­
                                                                        cylinder assembly isothermally and without internal irreversibil-
550 Chapter 11 Thermodynamic Relations

ities to a final pressure of 0.1 MPa. Evaluate the work done, in   ture, TR, pseudoreduced specific volume, vR, and appropriate
kJ/kg. Use a truncated virial equation of state with the form      dimensionless constants.

                   Z     1         B     C                         11.13 The Dieterici equation of state is
                                   v     v2
                                                                                           RT                a
where B and C are evaluated from steam table data at 240C                      p    a   v      b  b  exp  a  RTv  b
and pressures ranging from 0 to 1 MPa.
                                                                   (a) Using Eqs. 11.3, show that

11.9 Referring to the virial series, Eqs. 3.29 and 3.30, show                  a    4R2T    2  ,      b      RTc
                                                                                     pce2   c                pce2
  that B^  BRT, C^  (C  B2)R2T 2.

11.10 Express Eq. 11.5, the van der Waals equation in terms of     (b) Show that the equation of state can be expressed in terms
   the compressibility factor Z                                         of compressibility chart variables as

   (a) as a virial series in vR. [Hint: Expand the (vR  18)1                Z     a     vżR       b  exp  a    4      b
        term of Eq. 11.5 in a series.]                                             vRż                       TRvżRe2
                                                                                         1e2
   (b) as a virial series in pR.
   (c) Dropping terms involving ( pR)2 and higher in the virial    (c) Convert the result of part (b) to a virial series in vR. (Hint:
                                                                       Expand the (vR  1e2)1 term in a series. Also expand
       series of part (b), obtain the following approximate form:      the exponential term in a series.)

               Z  1  a 1  2764 b pR
                             8           TR TR

                                                                   11.14 The Peng­Robinson equation of state has the form

(d) Compare the compressibility factors determined from the                                RT             a
     equation of part (c) with tabulated compressibility factors                  p  v  b  v2  c2
     from the literature for 0  pR  0.6 and each of TR  1.0,
     1.2, 1.4, 1.6, 1.8, 2.0. Comment on the realm of validity     Using Eqs. 11.3, evaluate the constants a, b, c in terms of the
     of the approximate form.                                      critical pressure pc, critical temperature Tc, and critical com-
                                                                   pressibility factor Zc.
11.11 The Berthelot equation of state has the form

                 p        RT              a                        11.15 The p­v­T relation for chlorofluorinated hydrocarbons
                         vb              Tv2                          can be described by the Carnahan­Starling­DeSantis equation
                                                                      of state
(a) Using Eqs. 11.3, show that

                 27   R  2T  3        b  1 RTc                     pv          1    b  b2            b3           a
                             c              8 pc                   RT               11  b23                  RT 1v 
            a                   ,                                                                                        b2
                 64 pc

(b) Express the equation in terms of the compressibility fac-      where b  b4v, a  a0 exp (a1T  a2T 2), and b  b0 

     tor Z, the reduced temperature TR, and the pseudoreduced      b1T  b2T 2. For Refrigerants 12 and 13, the required coeffi-
     specific volume, vR.                                          cients for T in K, a in J # L/(mol)2, and b in L/mol are given

11.12 The Beattie­Bridgeman equation of state can be ex-           in Table P11.15. Specify which of the two refrigerants would
   pressed as                                                      allow the smaller amount of mass to be stored in a 10-m3
                                                                   vessel at 0.2 MPa, 80C.
                 RT 11    e21v           B2
            p              v2                   A
                                                v2
                                                                   Using Relations from Exact Differentials

where                                                              11.16 The differential of pressure obtained from a certain equa-
                                                                      tion of state is given by one of the following expressions. De-
       A    A0 a1     ab,             B    B0  a1    bb               termine the equation of state.
                      v                              v

              c                                                                   21v  b2             1v  b22
       e  vT 3                                                     dp  RT dv  RT 2 dT

and A0, B0, a, b, and c are constants. Express this equation of    dp                   RT        dv         R       dT
state in terms of the reduced pressure, pR, reduced tempera-                        1v
                                                                                           b22            v       b

R-12   a0  103           a1  103               a2  106      b0     b1  104        b2  108                  Table P11.15
R-13
        3.52412          2.77230               0.67318   0.15376   1.84195         5.03644
        2.29813          3.41828               1.52430   0.12814   1.84474        10.7951
                                                                     Problems: Developing Engineering Skills 551

11.17 Introducing dQint  T dS into Eq. 6.10 gives                    on freezing (Sec. 3.2.2). Verify this for the cases of lead that
                                           rev                       contracts on freezing and bismuth that expands on freezing.

         dQint  dU  p dV                                             11.29 Consider a four-legged chair at rest on an ice rink. The
              rev
                                                                        total mass of the chair and a person sitting on it is 80 kg. If
   Using this expression together with the test for exactness,          the ice temperature is 2C, determine the minimum total area,
                                                                        in cm2, the tips of the chair legs can have before the ice in con-
   demonstrate that Qint is not a property.
                                        rev                             tact with the legs would melt. Use data from Problem 11.27
                                                                        and let the local acceleration of gravity be 9.8 m /s2.
11.18 Using Eq. 11.35, check the consistency of

(a) the steam tables at 2 MPa, 400C.                                 11.30 Over a certain temperature interval, the saturation pres-
(b) the Refrigerant 134a tables at 2 bar, 50C.
                                                                        sure­temperature curve of a substance is represented by an
11.19 At a pressure of 1 atm, liquid water has a state of maxi-         equation of the form ln psat  A  BT, where A and B are
   mum density at about 4C. What can be concluded about                 empirically determined constants.
   (0s0p)T at
                                                                     (a) Obtain expressions for hg  hf and sg  sf in terms of
   (a) 3C?                                                                p­v­T data and the constant B.
   (b) 4C?
   (c) 5C?                                                           (b) Using the results of part (a), calculate hg  hf and sg  sf
                                                                          for water vapor at 25C and compare with steam table data.
11.20 A gas enters a compressor operating at steady state and
   is compressed isentropically. Does the specific enthalpy in-      11.31 Using data for water from Table A-2, determine the con-
   crease or decrease as the gas passes from the inlet to the exit?
                                                                        stants A and B to give the best fit in a least-squares sense to
11.21 Show that T, p, h, , and g can each be determined from a          the saturation pressure in the interval from 20 to 30C by the
   fundamental thermodynamic function of the form u  u(s, v).           equation ln psat  A  BT. Using this equation, determine
                                                                        dpsatdT at 25C. Calculate hg  hf at 25C and compare with
11.22 Evaluate p, s, u, h, cv, and cp for a substance for which         the steam table value.
   the Helmholtz function has the form

c    RT  ln  v     cT ż  c1    T     T   ln     T   d                11.32 Over limited intervals of temperature, the saturation pres-
             vż                Tż    Tż         Tż                      sure­temperature curve for two-phase liquid­vapor states can
                                                                        be represented by an equation of the form ln psat  A  BT,
where v and T denote specific volume and temperature, re-               where A and B are constants. Derive the following expression
spectively, at a reference state, and c is a constant.                  relating any three states on such a portion of the curve:

11.23 The Mollier diagram provides a graphical representation        psat, 3    a  psat,  2    t
   of the fundamental thermodynamic function h  h(s, p). Show
   that at any state fixed by s and p the properties T, v, u, , and  psat, 1       psat,1    b
   g can be evaluated using data obtained from the diagram.
                                                                        where   T2(T3  T1)T3(T2  T1).
11.24 Derive the relation cp  T(02g0T 2)p.                           11.33 Use the result of Problem 11.42 to determine

Evaluating s, u, and h                                               (a) the saturation pressure at 30C using saturation
                                                                          pressure­temperature data at 20 and 40C from Table
11.25 Using p­v­T data for saturated water from the steam                 A-2. Compare with the table value for saturation pressure
   tables, calculate at 50C                                               at 30C.

   (a) hg  hf.                                                       (b) the saturation temperature at 0.006 MPa using saturation
   (b) ug  uf.                                                            pressure­temperature data at 20 to 40C from Table A-2.
   (c) sg  sf.                                                            Compare with the saturation temperature at 0.006 MPa
                                                                          given in Table A-3.
   Compare with the values obtained using steam table data.
                                                                     11.34 Complete the following exercises dealing with slopes:
11.26 Using hfg, vfg, and psat at 26C from the ammonia tables,
   estimate the saturation pressure at 30C. Comment on the           (a) At the triple point of water, evaluate the ratio of the slope
   accuracy of your estimate.                                             of the vaporization line to the slope of the sublimation line.
                                                                          Use steam table data to obtain a numerical value for the
11.27 At 0C, the specific volumes of saturated solid water (ice)          ratio.
   and saturated liquid water are, respectively, vi  1.0911 
   103 m3/kg and vf  1.0002  103 m3/kg, and the change in            (b) Consider the superheated vapor region of a
   specific enthalpy on melting is hif  333.4 kJ/kg. Calculate the        temperature­entropy diagram. Show that the slope of a
   melting temperature of ice at (a) 250 bar, (b) 500 bar. Locate         constant specific volume line is greater than the slope of
   your answers on a sketch of the p­T diagram for water.                 a constant pressure line through the same state.

11.28 The line representing the two-phase solid­liquid region        (c) An enthalpy­entropy diagram (Mollier diagram) is often
   on the phase diagram slopes to the left for substances that ex-       used in analyzing steam turbines. Obtain an expression for
   pand on freezing and to the right for substances that contract        the slope of a constant-pressure line on such a diagram in
                                                                         terms of p­v­T data only.
552 Chapter 11 Thermodynamic Relations

   (d) A pressure­enthalpy diagram is often used in the refrig-      11.44 Derive expressions for the volume expansivity  and the
        eration industry. Obtain an expression for the slope of an      isothermal compressibility  in terms of T, p, Z, and the first
        isentropic line on such a diagram in terms of p­v­T data        partial derivatives of Z . For gas states with pR  3, TR  2,
        only.                                                           determine the sign of k. Discuss.

11.35 One kmol of argon at 300 K is initially confined to one        11.45 Show that the isothermal compressibility  is always
   side of a rigid, insulated container divided into equal volumes      greater than or equal to the isentropic compressibility .
   of 0.2 m3 by a partition. The other side is initially evacuated.
   The partition is removed and the argon expands to fill the en-    11.46 Prove that (00p)T  (00T)p.
   tire container. Using the van der Waals equation of state, de-    11.47 For aluminum at 0C,   2700 kg/m3,   71.4  108
   termine the final temperature of the argon, in K. Repeat using
   the ideal gas equation of state.                                     (K)1,   1.34  1013 m2/N, and cp  0.9211 kJ/kg # K. De-
                                                                        termine the percent error in cv that would result if it were as-
11.36 Obtain the relationship between cp and cv for a gas that          sumed that cp  cv.
   obeys the equation of state p(v  b)  RT.
                                                                     11.48 Estimate the temperature rise, in C, of mercury, initially
11.37 The p­v­T relation for a certain gas is represented closely       at 0C and 1 bar if its pressure were raised to 1000 bar isen-
   by v  RTp  B  ART, where R is the gas constant and A                 tropically. For mercury at 0C, cp  28.0 kJ/kmol # K,
   and B are constants. Determine expressions for the changes in        v  0.0147 m3/kmol, and   17.8  105 (K)1.
   specific enthalpy, internal energy, and entropy, [h(p2, T ) 
   h( p1, T)], [u(p2, T )  u(p1, T )], and [s(p2, T )  s( p1, T)],   11.49 At certain states, the p­v­T data for a particular gas can be
   respectively.                                                        represented as Z  1  ApT4, where Z is the compressibility
                                                                        factor and A is a constant. Obtain an expression for the specific
11.38 Develop expressions for the specific enthalpy, internal           heat cp in terms of the gas constant R, specific heat ratio k, and
   energy, and entropy changes [h(v2, T )  h(v1, T )], [u(v2, T )       Z. Verify that your expression reduces to Eq. 3.47a when Z  1.
   u(v1, T )], [s(v2, T )  s(v1, T )], using the
                                                                     11.50 For a gas obeying the van der Waals equation of state,
   (a) van der Waals equation of state.
   (b) Redlich­Kwong equation of state.                                (a) show that (0cv0v)T  0.

11.39 At certain states, the p­v­T data of a gas can be expressed       (b) develop an expression for cp  cv.
   as Z  1  ApT 4, where Z is the compressibility factor and            (c) develop expressions for [u(T2, v2)  u(T1, v1)] and
   A is a constant.
                                                                            [s(T2, v2)  s(T1, v1)].
   (a) Obtain an expression for (0p0T)v in terms of p, T, A, and        (d) complete the u and s evaluations if cv  a  bT, where
        the gas constant R.
                                                                             a and b are constants.
   (b) Obtain an expression for the change in specific entropy,
        [s(p2, T )  s( p1, T )].                                     11.51 Show that the specific heat ratio k can be expressed as k 
                                                                        cp(cp  Tv2). Using this expression together with data from
   (c) Obtain an expression for the change in specific enthalpy,        the steam tables, evaluate k for water vapor at 200 lbf/in.2, 500F.
       [h( p2, T )  h( p1, T )].
                                                                     11.52 For liquid water at 40C, 1 atm estimate
11.40 For a gas whose p­v­T behavior is described by Z  1 
   BpRT, where B is a function of temperature, derive expres-           (a) cv, in kJ/kg # K
   sions for the specific enthalpy, internal energy, and entropy        (b) the velocity of sound, in m/s.
   changes, [h( p2, T )  h( p1, T )], [u( p2, T )  u( p1, T )], and
   [s( p2, T )  s( p1, T )].                                            Use Data from Table 11.2, as required.

11.41 For a gas whose p­v­T behavior is described by Z  1            11.53 Using steam table data, estimate the velocity of sound in
   Bv  Cv2, where B and C are functions of temperature, de-             liquid water at 20C, 50 bar.
   rive an expression for the specific entropy change, [s(v2, T ) 
   s(v1, T )].                                                       11.54 For a gas obeying the equation of state p(v  b)  RT,
                                                                        where b is a positive constant, can the temperature be reduced
Using Other Thermodynamic Relations                                     in a Joule­Thomson expansion?

11.42 The volume of a 1-kg copper sphere is not allowed to           11.55 A gas is described by v  RTp  AT  B, where A
   vary by more than 0.1%. If the pressure exerted on the sphere        and B are constants. For the gas
   is increased from 10 bar while the temperature remains con-
   stant at 300 K, determine the maximum allowed pressure, in           (a) obtain an expression for the temperatures at the
   bar. Average values of , , and  are 8888 kg/m3, 49.2  106                 Joule­Thomson inversion states.
   (K)1, and 0.776  1011 m2/N, respectively.
                                                                        (b) obtain an expression for cp  cv.
11.43 Develop expressions for the volume expansivity  and
   the isothermal compressibility  for                               11.56 Determine the maximum Joule­Thomson inversion tem-
                                                                        perature in terms of the critical temperature Tc predicted by the
   (a) an ideal gas.
   (b) a gas whose equation of state is p(v  b)  RT.                    (a) van der Waals equation.
   (c) a gas obeying the van der Waals equation.                        (b) Redlich­Kwong equation.
                                                                        (c) Dieterici equation given in Problem 11.13.

                                                                     11.57 Derive an equation for the Joule­Thomson coefficient as
                                                                        a function of T and v for a gas that obeys the van der Waals
                                                                      Problems: Developing Engineering Skills 553

equation of state and whose specific heat cv is given by cv           11.66 Derive expressions for the enthalpy and entropy depar-
A  BT  CT 2, where A, B, C are constants. Evaluate the tem-              tures using an equation of state with the form Z  1  BpR,
peratures at the inversion states in terms of R, v, and the van          where B is a function of the reduced temperature, TR.

der Waals constants a and b.                                          11.67 The following expression for the enthalpy departure is
                                                                         convenient for use with equations of state that are explicit in
11.58  Show that Eq. 11.63 can be written as                             pressure:

          T2 01vT 2    b
       mJ  cp a
                 0T      p                                             h*1T 2  h1T, v2  1  v  0p
                                                                             RTc       RT
(a) Using this result, obtain an expression for the Joule­Thomson       TR c 1    Z           cTa b  pddvd
    coefficient for a gas obeying the equation of state                                       0T v
                                                                                           

       v    RT     Ap                                                    (a) Derive this expression.
             p     T2                                                    (b) Using the given expression, evaluate the enthalpy depar-

     where A is a constant.                                                   ture for a gas obeying the Redlich­Kwong equation of
                                                                              state.
(b) Using the result of part (a), determine cp, in kJ/kg # K, for        (c) Using the result of part (b), determine the change in spe-
     CO2 at 400 K, 1 atm, where J  0.57 K/atm. For CO2,                      cific enthalpy, in kJ/kmol, for CO2 undergoing an isother-
     A  2.78  103 m5 # K2/kg # N.                                            mal process at 300 K from 50 to 20 bar.

Developing Property Data                                              11.68 Using the equation of state of Problem 11.10 (c), evalu-
                                                                         ate v and cp for water vapor at 550C, 20 MPa and compare
11.59 If the specific heat cv of a gas obeying the van der Waals         with data from Table A-4 and Fig. 3.9, respectively. Discuss.
   equation is given at a particular pressure, p, by cv  A  BT,
   where A and B are constants, develop an expression for the         11.69 Ethylene at 67C, 10 bar enters a compressor operating
   change in specific entropy between any two states 1 and 2:            a steady state and is compressed isothermally without internal
   [s(T2, p2)  s(T1, p1)].                                               irreversibilities to 100 bar. Kinetic and potential energy
                                                                         changes are negligible. Evaluate in kJ per kg of ethylene flow-
11.60 For air, write a computer program that evaluates the               ing through the compressor
   change in specific enthalpy from a state where the temperature
   is 25C and the pressure is 1 atm to a state where the temper-         (a) the work required.
   ature is T and the pressure is p. Use the van der Waals equa-         (b) the heat transfer.
   tion of state and account for the variation of the ideal gas spe-
   cific heat as in Table A-21.                                       11.70 Methane at 27C, 10 MPa enters a turbine operating at
                                                                         steady state, expands adiabatically through a 5 : 1 pressure ra-
11.61 Using the Redlich­Kwong equation of state, determine               tio, and exits at 48C. Kinetic and potential energy effects
   the changes in specific enthalpy, in kJ/kmol, and entropy, in         are negligible. If cpo  35 kJ/kmol # K, determine the work de-
   kJ/kmol # K, for ethylene between 400 K, 1 bar and 400 K,             veloped per kg of methane flowing through the turbine. Com-
   100 bar.                                                              pare with the value obtained using the ideal gas model.

11.62 Using the Benedict­Webb­Rubin equation of state to-             11.71 Nitrogen (N2) enters a compressor operating at steady
   gether with a specific heat relation from Table A-21, determine       state at 1.5 MPa, 300 K and exits at 8 MPa, 500 K. If the work
   the change in specific enthalpy, in kJ/kmol, for methane be-          input is 240 kJ per kg of nitrogen flowing, determine the heat
   tween 300 K, 1 atm and 400 K, 200 atm.                                transfer, in kJ per kg of nitrogen flowing. Ignore kinetic and
                                                                         potential energy effects.
11.63 Using the Redlich­Kwong equation of state together with
   an appropriate specific heat relation, determine the final tem-    11.72 Oxygen (O2) enters a control volume operating at steady
   perature for an isentropic expansion of nitrogen from 400 K,          state with a mass flow rate of 9 kg/min at 100 bar, 287 K and
   250 atm to 5 atm.                                                     is compressed adiabatically to 150 bar, 400 K. Determine the
                                                                         power required, in kW, and the rate of entropy production, in
Using Enthalpy and Entropy Departures                                    kW/K. Ignore kinetic and potential energy effects.

11.64 Beginning with Eq. 11.90, derive Eq. 11.91.                     11.73 Argon gas enters a turbine operating at steady state at
                                                                         100 bar, 325 K and expands adiabatically to 40 bar, 235 K with
11.65 Derive an expression giving                                        no significant changes in kinetic or potential energy. Determine

   (a) the internal energy of a substance relative to that of its        (a) the work developed, in kJ per kg of argon flowing through
        ideal gas model at the same temperature: [u(T, v)  u*(T )].           the turbine.

   (b) the entropy of a substance relative to that of its ideal gas      (b) the amount of entropy produced, in kJ/K per kg of argon
        model at the same temperature and specific volume:                    flowing.
        [s(T, v)  s*(T, v)].
                                                                      11.74 Oxygen (O2) undergoes a throttling process from 100 bar,
                                                                         300 K to 20 bar. Determine the temperature after throttling, in
554 Chapter 11 Thermodynamic Relations

   K, and compare with the value obtained using the ideal gas                 (c) the van der Waals equation together with mixture values
   model.                                                                         for the constants a and b.

11.75 Water vapor enters a turbine operating at steady state at               (d) the rule of additive pressure together with the generalized
   30 MPa, 600C and expands adiabatically to 6 MPa with no sig-                    compressibility chart.
   nificant change in kinetic or potential energy. If the isentropic tur-
   bine efficiency is 80%, determine the work developed, in kJ per         11.82 Air having an approximate molar composition of 79%
   kg of steam flowing, using the generalized property charts. Com-           N2 and 21% O2 fills a 0.36-m3 vessel. The mass of mixture is
   pare with the result obtained using steam table data. Discuss.             100 kg. The measured pressure and temperature are 101 bar
                                                                              and 180 K, respectively. Compare the measured pressure with
11.76 Oxygen (O2) enters a nozzle operating at steady state at                the pressure predicted using
   60 bar, 300 K, 1 m /s and expands isentropically to 30 bar. De-
   termine the velocity at the nozzle exit, in m /s.                          (a) the ideal gas equation of state.
                                                                              (b) Kay's rule.
11.77 A quantity of nitrogen gas undergoes a process at a con-                (c) the additive pressure rule with the Redlich­Kwong equation.
   stant pressure of 80 bar from 220 to 300 K. Determine the                  (d) the additive volume rule with the Redlich­Kwong equation.
   work and heat transfer for the process, each in kJ per kmol of
   nitrogen.                                                               11.83 Using the Carnahan­Starling­DeSantis equation of
                                                                              state introduced in Problem 11.15, together with the following
11.78 A closed, rigid, insulated vessel having a volume of                    expressions for the mixture values of a and b:
   0.142 m3 contains oxygen (O2) initially at 100 bar, 7C. The
   oxygen is stirred by a paddle wheel until the pressure becomes                       a  y12a1  2y1y211  f122 1a1a221 2  y22a2
   150 bar. Determine the                                                               b  y1b1  y2b2

   (a) final temperature, in C.                                               where f12 is an empirical interaction parameter, determine the
   (b) work, in kJ.                                                           pressure, in kPa, at v  0.005 m3/kg, T  180C for a mix-
   (c) amount of exergy destroyed in the process, in kJ.                      ture of Refrigerants 12 and 13, in which Refrigerant 12 is 40%
                                                                              by mass. For a mixture of Refrigerants 12 and 13, f12  0.035.
   Let T0  7C.
                                                                           11.84 A rigid vessel initially contains carbon dioxide gas at
Evaluating p­v­T for Gas Mixtures                                             32C and pressure p. Ethylene gas is allowed to flow into the
                                                                              tank until a mixture consisting of 20% carbon dioxide and 80%
11.79 A preliminary design calls for a 1 kmol mixture of CO2                  ethylene (molar basis) exists within the tank at a temperature
   and C2H6 (ethane) to occupy a volume of 0.15 m3 at a tem-                  of 43C and a pressure of 110 bar. Determine the pressure p,
   perature of 400 K. The mole fraction of CO2 is 0.3. Owing to               in bar, using Kay's rule together with the generalized com-
   safety requirements, the pressure should not exceed 180 bar.               pressibility chart.
   Check the pressure using
                                                                           Analyzing Multicomponent Systems
   (a) the ideal gas equation of state.
   (b) Kay's rule together with the generalized compressibility            11.85 A binary solution at 25C consists of 59 kg of ethyl
                                                                              alcohol (C2H5OH) and 41 kg of water. The respective partial
        chart.                                                                molal volumes are 0.0573 and 0.0172 m3/kmol. Determine the
   (c) the additive pressure rule together with the generalized               total volume, in m3. Compare with the volume calculated us-
                                                                              ing the molar specific volumes of the pure components, each
       compressibility chart.                                                 a liquid at 25C, in the place of the partial molal volumes.

   Compare and discuss these results.                                      11.86 The following data are for a binary solution of ethane
11.80 A 0.1-m3 cylinder contains a gaseous mixture with a mo-                 (C2H6) and pentane (C5H12) at a certain temperature and
                                                                              pressure:
   lar composition of 97% CO and 3% CO2 initially at 138 bar. Due
   to a leak, the pressure of the mixture drops to 129 bar while the
   temperature remains constant at 30C. Using Kay's rule, estimate
   the amount of mixture, in kmol, that leaks from the cylinder.

mole fraction of ethane                 0.2                                0.3  0.4  0.5  0.6  0.7  0.8

volume (in m3) per kmol of solution 0.119 0.116 0.112 0.109 0.107 0.107 0.11

11.81 A gaseous mixture consisting of 0.75 kmol of hydrogen                Estimate
   (H2) and 0.25 kmol of nitrogen (N2) occupies 0.085 m3 at 25C.
   Estimate the pressure, in bar, using                                    (a) the specific volumes of pure ethane and pure pentane, each
                                                                                in m3/kmol.
   (a) the ideal gas equation of state.
   (b) Kay's rule together with the generalized compressibility            (b) the partial molal volumes of ethane and pentane for an
                                                                                equimolar solution, each in m3/kmol.
        chart.
                                                                                        Problems: Developing Engineering Skills 555

11.87 Using p­v­T data from the steam tables, determine the fu-               11.96 Methane enters a turbine operating at steady state at
   gacity of water as a saturated vapor at 280C, Compare with the                100 bar, 275 K and expands isothermally without irre-
   value obtained from the generalized fugacity chart.                           versibilities to 15 bar. There are no significant changes in
                                                                                 kinetic or potential energy. Using data from the generalized
11.88 Using the equation of state of Problem 11.10 (c), eval-                    fugacity and enthalpy departure charts, determine the power
   uate the fugacity of ammonia at 750 K, 100 atm and compare                    developed and heat transfer, each in kW, for a mass flow rate
   with the value obtained from Fig. A-6.                                        of 0.5 kg/s.

11.89 Using tabulated compressibility data from the literature,               11.97 Methane flows isothermally and without irreversibilities
   evaluate fp at TR  1.40 and pR  2.0. Compare with the                         through a horizontal pipe operating at steady state, entering at
   value obtained from Fig. A-6.                                                 50 bar, 300 K, 10 m /s and exiting at 40 bar. Using data from
                                                                                 the generalized fugacity chart, determine the velocity at the
11.90 Consider the truncated virial expansion                                    exit, in m /s.

      Z  1  B^ 1TR2pR  C^ 1TR2p2R  D^ 1TR2pR3                                 11.98 Determine the fugacity, in atm, for pure ethane at 310
                                                                                 K, 20.4 atm and as a component with a mole fraction of 0.35
(a) Using tabulated compressibility data from the literature,                    in an ideal solution at the same temperature and pressure.
     evaluate the coefficients B^, C^, and D^ for 0  pR  1.0 and
     each of TR  1.0, 1.2, 1.4, 1.6, 1.8, 2.0.                                11.99 Denoting the solvent and solute in a dilute binary liq-
                                                                                 uid solution at temperature T and pressure p by the subscripts
(b) Obtain an expression for ln ( fp) in terms of TR and pR. Us-                 1 and 2, respectively, show that if the fugacity of the solute is
     ing the coefficients of part (a), evaluate fp at selected states            proportional to its mole fraction in the solution: f2  ky2,
                                                                                 where  is a constant (Henry's rule), then the fugacity of the
     and compare with tabulated values from the literature.                      solvent is f1  y1 f1, where y1 is the solvent mole fraction and
                                                                                 f1 is the fugacity of pure 1 at T, p.
11.91 Derive the following approximation for the fugacity of
   a liquid at temperature T and pressure p:                                  11.100 A tank contains 310 kg of a gaseous mixture of 70%
                                                                                 ethane and 30% nitrogen (molar basis) at 311 K and 170 atm.
      f 1T, p2   f  L    1T  2  exp  e  vf 1T 2  3p      psat 1T  24  f          Determine the volume of the tank, in m3, using data from the
                    sat                  RT                                      generalized compressibility chart together with (a) Kay's rule,
                                                                                 (b) the ideal solution model. Compare with the measured tank
   where fsLat(T ) is the fugacity of the saturated liquid at temper-            volume of 1 m3.
   ature T. For what range of pressures might the approximation
   f (T, p)  fsLat(T ) apply?                                                 11.101 A tank contains a mixture of 70% ethane and 30%
                                                                                 nitrogen (N2) on a molar basis at 400 K, 200 atm. For 2130
11.92 Beginning with Eq. 11.122,                                                 kg of mixture, estimate the tank volume, in m3, using
   (a) evaluate ln f for a gas obeying the Redlich­Kwong equa-
        tion of state.                                                           (a) the ideal gas equation of state.
   (b) Using the result of part (a), evaluate the fugacity, in                   (b) Kay's rule together with data from the generalized com-
        bar, for Refrigerant 134a at 90C, 10 bar. Compare with
        the fugacity value obtained from the generalized fugacity                     pressibility chart.
        chart.                                                                   (c) the ideal solution model together with data from the gen-

11.93 Consider a one-inlet, one-exit control volume at steady                        eralized compressibility chart.
   state through which the flow is internally reversible and
   isothermal. Show that the work per unit of mass flowing can                11.102 An equimolar mixture of O2 and N2 enters a compres-
   be expressed in terms of the fugacity f as                                    sor operating at steady state at 10 bar, 220 K with a mass flow
                                                                                 rate of 1 kg/s. The mixture exits at 60 bar, 400 K with no
   #                                    V21         V22                          significant change in kinetic or potential energy. Stray heat
                                                                                 transfer from the compressor can be ignored. Determine for
a  Wcv  b      RT        ln  a  f2 b                       g1z1          z22     the compressor
     #                          f1               2
   m rienvt                                                                      (a) the power required, in kW.
                                                                                 (b) the rate of entropy production, in kW/K.
11.94 Propane (C3H8) enters a turbine operating at steady state
   at 100 bar, 400 K and expands isothermally without irre-                      Assume the mixture is modeled as an ideal solution. For the
   versibilities to 10 bar. There are no significant changes in ki-              pure components:
   netic or potential energy. Using data from the generalized fu-
   gacity chart, determine the power developed, in kW, for a mass
   flow rate of 50 kg/min.

11.95 Ethane (C2H6) is compressed isothermally without ir-                                   10 bar, 220 K             60 bar, 400 K
   reversibilities at a temperature of 320 K from 5 to 40 bar.                          h (kJ/kg) s (kJ/ kg # K)  h (kJ/kg) s (kJ/kg # K)
   Using data from the generalized fugacity and enthalpy de-
   parture charts, determine the work of compression and the                  Oxygen    195.6  5.521              358.2  5.601
   heat transfer, each in kJ per kg of ethane flowing. Assume                 Nitrogen  224.1  5.826              409.8  5.911
   steady-state operation and neglect kinetic and potential
   energy effects.                                                            11.103 A gaseous mixture with a molar analysis of 70% CH4
                                                                                 and 30% N2 enters a compressor operating at steady state at
556 Chapter 11 Thermodynamic Relations

10 bar, 250 K and a molar flow rate of 6 kmol/h. The mixture         11.104 The departure of a binary solution from ideal solution
exits the compressor at 100 bar. During compression, the tem-           behavior is gauged by the activity coefficient,  i  aiyi, where
perature of the mixture departs from 250 K by no more than              ai is the activity of component i and yi is its mole fraction in
0.1 K. The power required by the compressor is reported to be           the solution (i  1, 2). Introducing Eq. 11.140, the activity coef-
6 kW. Can this value be correct? Explain. Ignore kinetic and
potential energy effects. Assume the mixture is modeled as an          ficient can be expressed alternatively as gi  fi yi f °i. Using this
ideal solution. For the pure components at 250 K:
                                                                        expression together with the Gibbs­Duhem equation, derive the

                                                                        following relation among the activity coefficients and the mole

                                                                        fractions for a solution at temperature T and pressure p:

                h (kJ/kg)       s (kJ/kg # K)                             0  ln g1 b            0        ln g2 b
          10 bar 100 bar     10 bar 100 bar                                  0y1 p,                      0y2 p,
                                                                     ay1                   ay2

Methane   506.0      358.6   10.003           8.3716                                  T                           T
Nitrogen  256.18     229.68   5.962           5.188
                                                                     How might this expression be used?

Design & Open Ended Problems: Exploring Engineering Practice

11.1D Compressed natural gas (CNG) is being used as a fuel              exergy is stored by compressing the nitrogen. When the vehi-
   to replace gasoline for automobile engines. Aluminum cylin-          cle accelerates again, the gas expands and returns some exergy
   ders wrapped in a fibrous composite can provide lightweight,         to the hydraulic fluid which is in communication with the ve-
   economical, and safe on-board storage. The storage vessels           hicle's drive train, thereby assisting the vehicle to accelerate.
   should hold enough CNG for 100 to 125 miles of urban travel,         In a proposal for one such device, the nitrogen operates in the
   at storage pressures up to 20 Mpa, and with a maximum total          range 50­150 bar and 200­350 K. Develop a thermodynamic
   mass of 70 kg. Adhering to applicable standards, specify both        model of the accumulator and use the model to assess its suit-
   the size and number of cylinders that would meet the above           ability for vehicle deceleration/acceleration.
   design constraints.
                                                                     11.4D To investigate liquid­vapor phase transition behavior,
11.2D Develop the preliminary design of a thermal storage sys-          construct a p­v diagram for water showing isotherms in the
   tem that would recover automobile engine waste heat for later        range 0.7  TR  1.2 by solving the van der Waals equation
   use in improving the engine cold-start performance. Among            of state for pressure and specific volume at constant tempera-
   the specifications are: Reliable operation down to an ambient        ture. Superimpose the vapor dome on the diagram using satu-
   temperature of 30C, a storage duration of 16 hours, and no           rated liquid and saturated vapor data from the steam tables. In-
   more than 15 minutes of urban driving to return the storage          terpret the behavior of the various isotherms in the liquid and
   medium to its maximum temperature of 200C. Specify the               vapor regions on the diagram. Referring to the literature as nec-
   storage medium and determine whether the medium should be            essary, explain the behavior of the isotherms in the two-phase,
   charged by the engine exhaust gases, the engine coolant, or          liquid­vapor region, carefully distinguishing among stable,
   some combination. Explain how the system would be config-            metastable, and unstable states. Write a paper discussing the
   ured and where it would be located in the automobile.                plot and summarizing your findings.

11.3D Figure P11.3D shows the schematic of a hydraulic ac-           11.5D In the experiment for the regelation of ice, a small-
   cumulator in the form of a cylindrical pressure vessel with a        diameter wire weighted at each end is draped over a block of
   piston separating a hydraulic fluid from a charge of nitrogen        ice. The loaded wire is observed to cut slowly through the ice
   gas. The device has been proposed as a means for storing some        without leaving a trace. In one such set of experiments, a
   of the exergy of a decelerating vehicle as it comes to rest. The     weighted 1.00-mm diameter wire is reported to have passed
                                                                        through 0C ice at a rate of 54 mm /h. Perform the regelation
          Hydraulic          Piston                                     experiment and propose a plausible explanation for this
             fluid                                                      phenomenon.
                                    Nitrogen
                                       gas                           11.6D During a phase change from liquid to vapor at fixed
                                                                        pressure, the temperature of a binary nonazeotropic solution
 Figure P11.3D                                                          such as an ammonia­water solution increases rather than re-
                                                                        mains constant as for a pure substance. This attribute is ex-
                                                                        ploited in both the Kalina power cycle and in the Lorenz re-
                                                                        frigeration cycle. Write a report assessing the status of
                                                                        technologies based on these cycles. Discuss the principal ad-
                                                                        vantages of using binary nonazeotropic solutions. What are
Design & Open Ended Problems: Exploring Engineering Practice 557

   some of the main design issues related to their use in power        11.8D An inventor has proposed a new type of marine engine
   and refrigeration systems?                                             fueled by fresh water stored on board and seawater drawn in
                                                                          from the surrounding ocean. At steady state, the engine would
11.7D The Servel refrigerator works on an absorption principle            develop power from freshwater and seawater streams, each en-
   and requires no moving parts. An energy input by heat trans-           tering the engine at the ambient temperature and pressure. A
   fer is used to drive the cycle, and the refrigerant circulates due     single mixed stream would be discharged at the ambient tem-
   to its natural buoyancy. This type of refrigerator is commonly         perature and pressure. Critically evaluate this proposal.
   employed in mobile applications, such as recreational vehicles.
   Liquid propane is burned to provide the required energy input       11.9D Small Power Plants Pack Punch (see box Sec. 11.5).
   during mobile operation, and electric power is used when the           Using manufacturer's data, specify a natural gas-fueled mi-
   vehicle is parked and can be connected to an electrical outlet.        croturbine cogeneration system to provide for the needs of a
   Investigate the principles of operation of commercially avail-         hospital in your locale. Write a report including at least three
   able Servel-type systems, and study their feasibility for solar-       references.
   activated operation. Consider applications in remote locations
   where electricity or gas is not available. Write a report sum-
   marizing your findings.
                              C           Ideal Gas
                              H      Mixture and
                              A  Psychrometric
                              P     Applications
                              T

     12 E
                              R

chapter objective   E N G I N E E R I N G C O N T E X T Many systems of interest involve gas
                    mixtures of two or more components. To apply the principles of thermodynamics introduced
                    thus far to these systems requires that we evaluate properties of the mixtures. Means are
                    available for determining the properties of mixtures from the mixture composition and the
                    properties of the individual pure components from which the mixtures are formed. Methods
                    for this purpose are discussed both in Chap. 11 and in the present chapter.

                       The objective of the present chapter is to study mixtures where the overall mixture
                    and each of its components can be modeled as ideal gases. General ideal gas mixture
                    considerations are provided in the first part of the chapter. Understanding the behavior of
                    ideal gas mixtures of air and water vapor is prerequisite to considering air-conditioning
                    processes in the second part of the chapter. In those processes, we sometimes must con-
                    sider the presence of liquid water as well. We will also need to know how to handle ideal
                    gas mixtures when we study the subjects of combustion and chemical equilibrium in
                    Chapters 13 and 14, respectively.

                    IDEAL GAS MIXTURES:
                    GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS

                    12.1 Describing Mixture Composition

                    To specify the state of a mixture requires the composition and the values of two independ-
                    ent intensive properties such as temperature and pressure. The object of the present section
                    is to consider ways for describing mixture composition. In subsequent sections, we show
                    how mixture properties other than composition can be evaluated.

                        Consider a closed system consisting of a gaseous mixture of two or more components.
                    The composition of the mixture can be described by giving the mass or the number of moles
                    of each component present. With Eq. 1.10, the mass, the number of moles, and the molecu-
                    lar weight of a component i are related by

                                 ni    mi   (12.1)
                                       Mi

558
                                                                                                            12.1 Describing Mixture Composition 559

where mi is the mass, ni is the number of moles, and Mi is the molecular weight of compo-
nent i, respectively. When mi is expressed in terms of the kilogram, ni is in kmol. However,
any unit of mass can be used in this relationship.

   The total mass of the mixture, m, is the sum of the masses of its components

                                                                                    j  (12.2)

                         m  m1  m2  # # #  mj  a mi
                                                                                  i1

   The relative amounts of the components present in the mixture can be specified in terms
of mass fractions. The mass fraction mfi of component i is defined as

                         mfi    mi                                                     (12.3) mass fractions
                                m

A listing of the mass fractions of the components of a mixture is sometimes referred to as

a gravimetric analysis.                                                                         gravimetric analysis

Dividing each term of Eq. 12.2 by the total mass of mixture m and using Eq. 12.3

                                   j                                                   (12.4)

                         1  a mfi
                                 i1

That is, the sum of the mass fractions of all the components in a mixture is equal to unity.
   The total number of moles in a mixture, n, is the sum of the number of moles of each of

its components

                                                                                j      (12.5)

                         n  n1  n2  # # #  nj  a ni
                                                                              i1

   The relative amounts of the components present in the mixture also can be described in
terms of mole fractions. The mole fraction yi of component i is defined as

                         yi     ni                                                     (12.6) mole fractions
                                n

A listing of the mole fractions of the components of a mixture may be called a molar analysis.  molar analysis
An analysis of a mixture in terms of mole fractions is also called a volumetric analysis.       volumetric analysis

   Dividing each term of Eq. 12.5 by the total number of moles of mixture n and using
Eq. 12.6

                                   j                                                   (12.7)

                         1  a yi
                                 i1

That is, the sum of the mole fractions of all the components in a mixture is equal to unity.
   The apparent (or average) molecular weight of the mixture, M, is defined as the ratio of

the total mass of the mixture, m, to the total number of moles of mixture, n

                         M      m                                                                 apparent molecular
                                n                                                      (12.8)

                                                                                                  weight
560 Chapter 12 Ideal Gas Mixture and Psychrometric Applications

         TABLE 12.1 Approximate Composition of Dry Air

         Component                                               Mole Fraction
                                                                       (%)

         Nitrogen                                                78.08
         Oxygen                                                  20.95
         Argon                                                    0.93
         Carbon dioxide
         Neon, helium, methane, and others                        0.03
                                                                  0.01

            Equation 12.8 can be expressed in a convenient alternative form. With Eq. 12.2, it
         becomes

                                                M  m1  m2  # # #  mj
                                                                    n

         Introducing mi  niMi from Eq. 12.1
                                            M  n1M1  n2M2  # # #  njMj
                                                                    n

         Finally, with Eq. 12.6, the apparent molecular weight of the mixture can be calculated as a
         mole-fraction average of the component molecular weights

                                                                             j  (12.9)

                                                                 M  a yi Mi
                                                                          i1

dry air      for example. . . consider the case of air. A sample of atmospheric air contains sev-
         eral gaseous components including water vapor and contaminants such as dust, pollen, and
         pollutants. The term dry air refers only to the gaseous components when all water vapor and
         contaminants have been removed. The molar analysis of a typical sample of dry air is given
         in Table 12.1. Selecting molecular weights for nitrogen, oxygen, argon, and carbon dioxide
         from Table A-1, and neglecting the trace substances neon, helium, etc., the apparent molec-
         ular weight of dry air obtained from Eq. 12.9 is

                    M  0.7808128.022  0.2095132.002  0.0093139.942  0.0003144.012
                         28.97 kg/kmol

         This value, which is the entry for air in Tables A-1, would not be altered significantly if the
         trace substances were also included in the calculation. 

            Next, we consider two examples illustrating, respectively, the conversion from an analy-
         sis in terms of mole fractions to an analysis in terms of mass fractions, and conversely.

E X A M P L E 1 2 . 1 Converting Mole Fractions to Mass Fractions

The molar analysis of the gaseous products of combustion of a certain hydrocarbon fuel is CO2, 0.08; H2O, 0.11; O2, 0.07;
N2, 0.74. (a) Determine the apparent molecular weight of the mixture. (b) Determine the composition in terms of mass frac-
tions (gravimetric analysis).
                             12.1 Describing Mixture Composition 561

     SOLUTION

     Known: The molar analysis of the gaseous products of combustion of a hydrocarbon fuel is given.

     Find: Determine (a) the apparent molecular weight of the mixture, (b) the composition in terms of mass fractions.

     Analysis:

     (a) Using Eq. 12.9 and approximate molecular weights from Table A-1

                                                   M  0.081442  0.111182  0.071322  0.741282
                                                        28.46 kg/kmol

     (b) Equations 12.1, 12.3, and 12.6 are the key relations required to determine the composition in terms of mass fractions.

         Although the actual amount of mixture is not known, the calculations can be based on any convenient amount. Let us base

 the solution on 1 kmol of mixture. Then, with Eq. 12.6 the amount ni of each component present in kmol is numerically equal

     to the mole fraction, as listed in column (ii) of the accompanying table. Column (iii) of the table gives the respective molec-
     ular weights of the components.

         Column (iv) of the table gives the mass mi of each component, in kg per kmol of mixture, obtained with Eq. 12.1 in the
     form mi  Mini. The values of column (iv) are obtained by multiplying each value of column (ii) by the corresponding value
     of column (iii). The sum of the values in column (iv) is the mass of the mixture: kg of mixture per kmol of mixture. Note
     that this sum is just the apparent mixture molecular weight determined in part (a). Finally, using Eq. 12.3, column (v) gives
     the mass fractions as a percentage. The values of column (v) are obtained by dividing the values of column (iv) by the column
     (iv) total and multiplying by 100.

(i)        (ii)a    (iii)    (iv)b  (v)

Component  ni       Mi       mi     m fi (%)

CO2        0.08     44       3.52   12.37

H2O        0.11     18       1.98   6.96

O2         0.07     32       2.24   7.87

N2         0.74     28      20.72   72.80

           1.00              28.46 100.00

aEntries in this column have units of kmol per kmol of mixture. For example,
the first entry is 0.08 kmol of CO2 per kmol of mixture.

bEntries in this column have units of kg per kmol of mixture. For example, the
first entry is 3.52 kg of CO2 per kmol of mixture. The column sum, 28.46, has
units of kg of mixture per kmol of mixture.

 If the solution to part (b) were conducted on the basis of some other assumed amount of mixture--for example, 100 kmol

    the same result for the mass fractions would be obtained, as can be verified.

E X A M P L E 1 2 . 2 Converting Mass Fractions to Mole Fractions

A gas mixture has the following composition in terms of mass fractions: H2, 0.10; N2, 0.60; CO2, 0.30. Determine (a) the
composition in terms of mole fractions and (b) the apparent molecular weight of the mixture.

SOLUTION
Known: The gravimetric analysis of a gas mixture is known.
Find: Determine the analysis of the mixture in terms of mole fractions (molar analysis) and the apparent molecular weight
of the mixture.
562 Chapter 12 Ideal Gas Mixture and Psychrometric Applications

     Analysis:

     (a) Equations 12.1, 12.3, and 12.6 are the key relations required to determine the composition in terms of mole fractions.
         Although the actual amount of mixture is not known, the calculation can be based on any convenient amount. Let us base

 the solution on 100 kg. Then, with Eq. 12.3, the amount mi of each component present, in kg, is equal to the mass fraction

     multiplied by 100 kg. The values are listed in column (ii) of the accompanying table. Column (iii) of the table gives the
     respective molecular weights of the components.

         Column (iv) of the table gives the amount ni of each component, in kmol per 100 kg of mixture, obtained using Eq. 12.1.
     The values of column (iv) are obtained by dividing each value of column (ii) by the corresponding value of column (iii). The
     sum of the values of column (iv) is the total amount of mixture, in kmol per 100 kg of mixture. Finally, using Eq. 12.6, column
     (v) gives the mole fractions as a percentage. The values of column (v) are obtained by dividing the values of column (iv) by
     the column (iv) total and multiplying by 100.

  (i)        (ii)a    (iii)                                              (iv)b  (v)

  Component  mi       Mi                                                    ni  yi (%)

  H2         10               2                                          5.00   63.9

  N2         60       28                                                 2.14   27.4

  CO2        30       44                                                 0.68   8.7

             100                                                         7.82   100.0

  aEntries in this column have units of kg per 100 kg of mixture. For example, the
  first entry is 10 kg of H2 per 100 kg of mixture.

  bEntries in this column have units of kmol per 100 kg of mixture. For example,
  the first entry is 5.00 kmol of H2 per 100 kg of mixture. The column sum, 7.82,
  has units of kmol of mixture per 100 kg of mixture.

  (b) The apparent molecular weight of the mixture can be found by using Eq. 12.9 and the calculated mole fractions. The
  value can be determined alternatively by using the column (iv) total giving the total amount of mixture in kmol per 100 kg
  of mixture. Thus, with Eq. 12.8

             Mm       100 kg                  kg
                                   12.79
                    n 7 .82 kmol                                   kmol

   If the solution to part (a) were conducted on the basis of some other assumed amount of mixture, the same result for the

      mass fractions would be obtained, as can be verified.

   Although H2 has the smallest mass fraction, its mole fraction is the largest.

  12.2 Relating p, V, and T for
             Ideal Gas Mixtures

  The definitions given in Sec. 12.1 apply generally to mixtures. In the present section we are
  concerned only with ideal gas mixtures and introduce two models used in conjunction with
  this idealization: the Dalton model and the Amagat model.

     Consider a system consisting of a number of gases contained within a closed vessel of
  volume V as shown in Fig. 12.1. The temperature of the gas mixture is T and the pressure is
  p. The overall mixture is considered an ideal gas, so p, V, T, and the total number of moles
  of mixture n are related by the ideal gas equation of state

                                                                 p  n RT                (12.10)
                                                                         V

  With reference to this system, let us consider in turn the Dalton and Amagat models.
                                                                       12.2 Relating p, V, and T for Ideal Gas Mixtures 563

Temperature = T
                           Pressure = p

Gas 1 : n1  n moles
Gas 2 : n2  mixture

Gas j : nj

Boundary    Volume = V                        Figure 12.1 Mixture of several gases.

DALTON MODEL. The Dalton model is consistent with the concept of an ideal gas as be-                 Dalton model
ing made up of molecules that exert negligible forces on one another and whose volume is             partial pressure
negligible relative to the volume occupied by the gas (Sec. 3.5). In the absence of signifi-
cant intermolecular forces, the behavior of each component would be unaffected by the pres-
ence of the other components. Moreover, if the volume occupied by the molecules is a very
small fraction of the total volume, the molecules of each gas present may be regarded as free
to roam throughout the full volume. In keeping with this simple picture, the Dalton model
assumes that each mixture component behaves as an ideal gas as if it were alone at the
temperature T and volume V of the mixture.

   It follows from the Dalton model that the individual components would not exert the mix-
ture pressure p but rather a partial pressure. As shown below, the sum of the partial pressures
equals the mixture pressure. The partial pressure of component i, pi, is the pressure that ni moles
of component i would exert if the component were alone in the volume V at the mixture tem-
perature T. The partial pressure can be evaluated using the ideal gas equation of state

                                               pi     ni RT                          (12.11)
                                                       V

Dividing Eq. 12.11 by Eq. 12.10

                                         pi    ni RTV       ni     yi
                                         p     nRTV         n

Thus, the partial pressure of component i can be evaluated in terms of its mole fraction yi
and the mixture pressure p

                                               pi  yi p                              (12.12)

   To show that the sum of partial pressures equals the mixture pressure, sum both sides of
Eq. 12.12 to obtain

                                         j         j            j

                                         a pi  a yip  p a yi
                                 i1            i1               i1

Since the sum of the mole fractions is unity (Eq. 12.7), this becomes

                                                         j                           (12.13)

                                               p  a pi
                                                       i1
564 Chapter 12 Ideal Gas Mixture and Psychrometric Applications

Amagat model    AMAGAT MODEL. The underlying assumption of the Amagat model is that each mixture
partial volume  component behaves as an ideal gas as if it existed separately at the pressure p and tempera-
                ture T of the mixture. The volume that ni moles of component i would occupy if the com-
                ponent existed at p and T is called the partial volume, Vi, of component i. As shown below,
                the sum of the partial volumes equals the total volume. The partial volume can be evaluated
                using the ideal gas equation of state

                                                                 Vi     ni RT         (12.14)
                                                                          p

                Dividing Eq. 12.14 by the total volume V

                Vi                                               ni RTp    ni     yi
                V                                                nRTp      n

                Thus, the partial volume of component i also can be evaluated in terms of its mole fraction
                yi and the total volume

                                                                 Vi  yiV              (12.15)

                This relationship between volume fraction and mole fraction underlies the use of the term
                volumetric analysis as signifying an analysis of a mixture in terms of mole fractions.

                   To show that the sum of partial volumes equals the total volume, sum both sides of
                Eq. 12.15 to obtain

                j                                                    j         j

                a Vi  a yiV  V a yi
                i1                                               i1            i1

                Since the sum of the mole fractions equals unity, this becomes

                                                                            j         (12.16)

                                                                 V  a Vi
                                                                         i1

                CLOSING COMMENT. The Dalton and Amagat models are special cases, respectively, of
                the additive pressure and additive volume rules introduced in Sec. 11.8, which do not require
                the assumption of the ideal gas model. The concept of an ideal gas mixture is a special case
                of the ideal solution concept introduced in Sec. 11.9.

                12.3 Evaluating U, H, S, and Specific Heats

                To apply the conservation of energy principle to a system involving an ideal gas mixture re-
                quires evaluation of the internal energy, enthalpy, or specific heats of the mixture at various
                states. Similarly, to conduct an analysis using the second law normally requires the entropy
                of the mixture. The objective of the present section is to develop means to evaluate these
                properties for ideal gas mixtures.

                EVALUATING U AND H. Consider a closed system consisting of an ideal gas mixture. Ex-
                tensive properties of the mixture, such as U, H, or S, can be found by adding the contribu-
                tion of each component at the condition at which the component exists in the mixture. Let
                us apply this model to internal energy and enthalpy.
                                                                            12.3 Evaluating U, H, S, and Specific Heats 565

   Since the internal energy and enthalpy of ideal gases are functions of temperature only,
the values of these properties for each component present in the mixture are determined by
the mixture temperature alone. Accordingly

                                                                j           (12.17)
                                                                            (12.18)
     U  U1  U2  # # #  Uj  a Ui
                                                              i1
                                                                j

     H  H1  H2  # # #  Hj  a Hi
                                                              i1

where Ui and Hi are the internal energy and enthalpy, respectively, of component i evaluated
at the mixture temperature.

   Equations 12.17 and 12.18 can be rewritten on a molar basis as

                                                                         j  (12.19)

     nu  n1u1  n2u2  # # #  njuj  a niui
                                                                       i1

and

                                                                         j  (12.20)

     nh  n1h1  n2h2  # # #  nj hj  a ni hi
                                                                       i1

where u and h are the specific internal energy and enthalpy of the mixture per mole of mixture,
and ui and hi are the specific internal energy and enthalpy of component i per mole of i.
Dividing by the total number of moles of mixture n gives expressions for the specific inter-
nal energy and enthalpy of the mixture per mole of mixture, respectively

               j                                                            (12.21)
                                                                            (12.22)
     u  a yi ui
             i1
               j

     h  a yi hi
             i1

Each of the molar internal energy and enthalpy terms appearing in Eqs. 12.19 through 12.22
is evaluated at the mixture temperature only.

EVALUATING cv AND cP. Differentiation of Eqs. 12.21 and 12.22 with respect to temper-
ature results, respectively, in the following expressions for the specific heats cv and cp of the
mixture on a molar basis

                j                                                           (12.23)
                                                                            (12.24)
     cv  a yi cv,i
              i1
                j

     cp  a yi cp,i
              i1

That is, the mixture specific heats cp and cv are mole-fraction averages of the respective com-

ponent specific heats. The specific heat ratio for the mixture is k  cp cv.

EVALUATING S. The entropy of a mixture can be found, as for U and H, by adding the
contribution of each component at the condition at which the component exists in the mix-
ture. The entropy of an ideal gas depends on two properties, not on temperature alone as for
internal energy and enthalpy. Accordingly, for the mixture

                                                            j               (12.25)

     S  S1  S2  # # #  Sj  a Si
                                                          i1
566 Chapter 12 Ideal Gas Mixture and Psychrometric Applications

where Si is the entropy of component i evaluated at the mixture temperature T and partial
pressure pi (or at temperature T and total volume V ).

   Equation 12.25 can be written on a molar basis as

                                                                                        j              (12.26)

                      ns  n1s1  n2s2  # # #  nj sj  a ni si
                                                                                      i1

where s is the entropy of the mixture per mole of mixture and si is the entropy of component i
per mole of i. Dividing by the total number of moles of mixture gives an expression for the
entropy of the mixture per mole of mixture

                                                                           j                           (12.27)

                                                                 s  a yi si
                                                                        i1

The specific entropies si of Eqs. 12.26 and 12.27 are evaluated at the mixture temperature T
and the partial pressure pi.

WORKING ON A MASS BASIS. In cases where it is convenient to work on a mass basis,
the foregoing expressions would be written with the mass of the mixture, m, and the mass
of component i in the mixture, mi, replacing, respectively, the number of moles of mixture,
n, and the number of moles of component i, ni. Similarly, the mass fraction of component
i, mfi, would replace the mole fraction, yi. All specific internal energies, enthalpies, and en-
tropies would be evaluated on a unit mass basis rather than on a per mole basis as above.
The development of the appropriate expressions is left as an exercise. By using the molecu-
lar weight of the mixture or of component i, as appropriate, data can be converted from a
mass basis to a molar basis, or conversely, with relations of the form

u  Mu, h  Mh, cp  Mcp, cv  Mcv, s  Ms                                                                  (12.28)

for the mixture, and

ui  Miui,             h  Mihi,  cp,i  Micp,i,                                 cv,i  Micv,i,  si  Misi  (12.29)

for component i.

12.4 Analyzing Systems Involving Mixtures

To perform thermodynamic analyses of systems involving nonreacting ideal gas mixtures re-
quires no new fundamental principles. The conservation of mass and energy principles and
the second law of thermodynamics are applicable in the forms previously introduced. The
only new aspect is the proper evaluation of the required property data for the mixtures in-
volved. This is illustrated in the present section, which deals with two classes of problems
involving mixtures. In Sec. 12.4.1 the mixture is already formed, and we study processes in
which there is no change in composition. Section 12.4.2 considers the formation of mixtures
from individual components that are initially separate.

 12.4.1 Mixture Processes at Constant Composition

In the present section we are concerned with the case of ideal gas mixtures undergoing
processes during which the composition remains constant. The number of moles of each com-
ponent present, and thus the total number of moles of mixture, remain the same throughout
the process. This case is shown schematically in Fig. 12.2, which is labeled with expressions
for U, H, and S of a mixture at the initial and final states of a process undergone by the
mixture. In accordance with the discussion of Sec. 12.3, the specific internal energies and
                                                                           12.4 Analyzing Systems Involving Mixtures 567

    State 1                         State 2

(n1, n2, ..., nj)             (n1, n2, ..., nj)
       at                            at

     T1, p1                        T2, p2

       j_                            j_
U1  =         niui(T1)        U2  =         niui(T2)
           1                             1
       i=                            i=

       j_                            j_

H1  =      1  nih  i(T1)      H2  =      1  nih  i(T2)

       i=                            i=

       j_                            j_                      Figure 12.2 Process of an ideal gas
S1  =         nisi(T1,  pi1)  S2  =         nisi(T2,  pi2)  mixture.
           1                             1
       i=                            i=

enthalpies of the components are evaluated at the temperature of the mixture. The specific
entropy of each component is evaluated at the mixture temperature and the partial pressure
of the component in the mixture.

   The changes in the internal energy and enthalpy of the mixture during the process are
given, respectively, by

                                                      j                    (12.30)
                                                                           (12.31)
                              U2  U1  a ni 3 ui1T22  ui 1T12 4
                                                   i1
                                                      j

                              H2  H1  a ni 3 hi 1T22  hi 1T12 4
                                                   i1

where T1 and T2 denote the temperature at the initial and final states. Dividing by the num-
ber of moles of mixture, n, expressions for the change in internal energy and enthalpy of the
mixture per mole of mixture result

                                               j                           (12.32)
                                                                           (12.33)
                                  ˘u  a yi 3 ui 1T22  ui 1T12 4
                                             i1
                                               j

                                  ˘h  a yi 3 hi 1T22  hi 1T12 4
                                             i1

Similarly, the change in entropy for the mixture is

                                                    j                      (12.34)

                              S2  S1  a ni 3 si 1T2, pi22  si 1T1, pi12 4
                                                 i1

where pi1 and pi2 denote, respectively, the initial and final partial pressures of component i.
Dividing by the total moles of mixture, Eq. 12.34 becomes

                                           j                               (12.35)

                              ˘s  a yi 3 si 1T2, pi22  si 1T1, pi12 4
                                         i1

Companion expressions for Eqs. 12.30 through 12.35 on a mass basis also can be written.
This is left as an exercise.

   The foregoing expressions giving the changes in internal energy, enthalpy, and entropy of
the mixture are written in terms of the respective property changes of the components.
Accordingly, different datums might be used to assign specific enthalpy values to the various
568 Chapter 12 Ideal Gas Mixture and Psychrometric Applications

                                components because the datums would cancel when the component enthalpy changes are cal-
                                culated. Similar remarks apply to the cases of internal energy and entropy.

USING IDEAL GAS TABLES. For several common gases modeled as ideal gases, the quan-
tities ui and hi appearing in the foregoing expressions can be evaluated as functions of tem-
perature only from Tables A-22 and A-23. Table A-22 for air gives these quantities on a mass
basis. Table A-23 gives them on a molar basis. The ideal gas tables also can be used to eval-
uate the entropy change. The change in specific entropy of component i required by Eqs. 12.34
and 12.35 can be determined with Eq. 6.21b as

             ˘si    s°i 1T22    s°i 1T12    R  ln  pi2
                                                   pi1

Since the mixture composition remains constant, the ratio of the partial pressures in this
expression is the same as the ratio of the mixture pressures, as can be shown by using
Eq. 12.12 to write

                      pi2  yi p2  p2
                      pi1 yi p1 p1

Accordingly, when the composition is constant, the change in the specific entropy of com-
ponent i is simply

             ˘si    s°i 1T22    s°i 1T12    R  ln  p2                 (12.36)
                                                   p1

where p1 and p2 denote, respectively, the initial and final mixture pressures. The terms s°i
of Eq. 12.36 can be obtained as functions of temperature for several common gases from
Table A-23. Table A-22 for air gives s° versus temperature.

ASSUMING CONSTANT SPECIFIC HEATS. When the component specific heats cv,i and cp,i
are taken as constants, the specific internal energy, enthalpy, and entropy changes of the mix-
ture and the components of the mixture are given by

˘u  cv 1T2  T12,                ˘ui  cv,i 1T2  T12                    (12.37)
                                                                      (12.38)
˘h  cp 1T2  T12 ,               ˘hi  cp,i 1T2  T12
                                                                      (12.39)
˘s    cp ln  T2    R  ln  p2,   ˘si         cp,i ln  T2    R  ln  p2
             T1           p1                         T1           p1

where the mixture specific heats cv and cp are evaluated from Eqs. 12.23 and 12.24, respec-
tively, using data from Tables A-20 or the literature, as required. The expression for ˘u can
be obtained formally by substituting the above expression for ˘ui into Eq. 12.32 and using
Eq. 12.23 to simplify the result. Similarly, the expressions for ˘h and ˘s can be obtained by
inserting ˘hi and ˘si into Eqs. 12.33 and 12.35, respectively, and using Eq. 12.24 to simplify.
In the equations for entropy change, the ratio of mixture pressures replaces the ratio of par-
tial pressures as discussed above. Similar expressions can be written for the mixture specific
internal energy, enthalpy, and entropy changes on a mass basis. This is left as an exercise.

USING COMPUTER SOFTWARE. The changes in internal energy, enthalpy, and entropy
required in Eqs. 12.32, 12.33, and 12.35, respectively, also can be evaluated using computer
software. Interactive Thermodynamics: IT provides data for a large number of gases mod-
eled as ideal gases, and its use is illustrated in Example 12.4 below.

   The next example illustrates the use of ideal gas mixture relations for analyzing a com-
pression process.
                                                                                                                          12.4 Analyzing Systems Involving Mixtures 569

E X A M P L E 1 2 . 3 Compressing an Ideal Gas Mixture

A mixture of 0.3 kg of carbon dioxide and 0.2 kg of nitrogen is compressed from p1  1 bar, T1  300 K to p2  3 bars in
a polytropic process for which n  1.25. Determine (a) the final temperature, in K, (b) the work, in kJ, (c) the heat transfer,
in kJ, (d) the change in entropy of the mixture, in kJ/K.

SOLUTION

Known: A mixture of 0.3 kg of CO2 and 0.2 kg of N2 is compressed in a polytropic process for which n  1.25. At the
initial state, p1  1 bar, T1  300K. At the final state, p2  3 bar.

Find: Determine the final temperature, in K, the work, in kJ, the heat transfer, kJ, and the entropy change of the mixture in,
kJ/K.

Schematic and Given Data:

Boundary                 p
                                      2

                                               n = 1.25

     0.3 kg CO2          States of the
     0.2 kg N2             mixture

p1 = 1 bar, T1 = 300 K,                                                     1
       p2 = 3 bars                                                                    v
                                                                                                 Figure E12.3

Assumptions:

1. As shown in the accompanying figure, the system is the mixture of CO2 and N2. The mixture composition remains con-
stant during the compression.

2. Each mixture component behaves as if it were an ideal gas occupying the entire system volume at the mixture tempera-
ture. The overall mixture acts as an ideal gas.
3. The compression process is a polytropic process for which n  1.25.

4. The changes in kinetic and potential energy between the initial and final states can be ignored.

Analysis:

(a) For an ideal gas, the temperatures and pressures at the end states of a polytropic process are related by Eq. 3.56

                                                                  p2    1n    12n

                                                       T2    T1a  p1  b

Inserting values

                                                                3 0.2    374 K
                         T2                                300  ab
                                                                 1

(b) The work for the compression process is given by

                                      2

                                                                    W  p dV

                                                                                                                       1

Introducing pVn  constant and performing the integration

                                                       W        p2V2    p1V1
                                                                   1    n

With the ideal gas equation of state, this reduces to

                         W                                 m1RM2 1T2                                                      T12

                                                                  1n
570 Chapter 12 Ideal Gas Mixture and Psychrometric Applications

      The mass of the mixture is m  0.3  0.2  0.5 kg. The apparent molecular weight of the mixture can be calculated
  using M  mn, where n is the total number of moles of mixture. With Eq. 12.1, the numbers of moles of CO2 and N2 are,
  respectively

           0.3                                                    0.2
  nCO2  44  0.0068 kmol,                                  nN2  28  0.0071 kmol

  The total number of moles of mixture is then n  0.0139 kmol. The apparent molecular weight of the mixture is M 
  0.50.0139  35.97.

      Calculating the work

     10.5  kg2  a    8.314 kJ                             b  1374  K    300  K2
                   35.97 kg # °K
  W
                                                          1  1.25

   34.21 kJ

  where the minus sign indicates that work is done on the mixture, as expected.
  (c) With assumption 4, the closed system energy balance can be placed in the form

                                                                     Q  ˘U  W

  where U is the change in internal energy of the mixture.
      The change in internal energy of the mixture equals the sum of the internal energy changes of the components. With

  Eq. 12.30

  ˘U  nCO2 3 uCO21T22  uCO21T12 4  nN2 3 uN21T22  uN21T12 4

  This form is convenient because Table A-23 gives internal energy values for N2 and CO2, respectively, on a molar basis. With
  values from this table

  ˘U  10.00682 19198  69392  10.00712 17770  62292
        26.3 kJ

  Inserting values for U and W into the expression for Q

     Q  26.3  34.21  7.91 kJ

  where the minus sign signifies a heat transfer from the system.
  (d) The change in entropy of the mixture equals the sum of the entropy changes of the components. With Eq. 12.34

           ˘S  nCO2 ˘sCO2  nN2 ˘sN2

  where ˘sN2 and ˘sCO2 are evaluated using Eq. 12.36 and values of s ° for N2 and CO2 from Table A-23. That is

  ˘S  0.0068a222.475  213.915  8.314 3b
                                                                             1

      0.0071a198.105  191.682  8.314 3b
                                                       1

   .0231 kJ/K

  Entropy decreases in the process because entropy is transferred from the system accompanying heat transfer.

   In view of the relatively small temperature change, the changes in the internal energy and entropy of the mixture can be

      evaluated alternatively using the constant specific heat relations, Eqs. 12.37 and 12.39, respectively. In these equations, cv
      and cp are specific heats for the mixture determined using Eqs. 12.23 and 12.24 together with appropriate specific heat
      values for the components chosen from Table A-20.

   Since the composition remains constant, the ratio of mixture pressures equals the ratio of partial pressures, so Eq. 12.36

      can be used to evaluate the component specific entropy changes required here.
                                                                                                    12.4 Analyzing Systems Involving Mixtures 571

   The next example illustrates the application of ideal gas mixture principles for the analy-
sis of a mixture expanding isentropically through a nozzle. The solution features the use of
table data and IT as an alternative.

E X A M P L E 1 2 . 4 Gas Mixture Expanding Isentropically through a Nozzle

A gas mixture consisting of CO2 and O2 with mole fractions 0.8 and 0.2, respectively, expands isentropically and at steady
state through a nozzle from 700 K, 5 bars, 3 m/s to an exit pressure of 1 bar. Determine (a) the temperature at the nozzle exit,
in K, (b) the entropy changes of the CO2 and O2 from inlet to exit, in kJ/kmol # K, (c) the exit velocity, in m/s.

SOLUTION

Known: A gas mixture consisting of CO2 and O2 in specified proportions expands isentropically through a nozzle from spec-
ified inlet conditions to a given exit pressure.

Find: Determine the temperature at the nozzle exit, in K, the entropy changes of the CO2 and O2 from inlet to exit, in
kJ/kmol # K, and the exit velocity, in m/s.

Schematic and Given Data:

V1 = 3 m/s                                                                 T                    1 p1 = 5 bars
p1 = 5 bars                                                                                           T1 = 700 K
T1 = 700 K                                                p2 =
                                                          1 bar

                                                                                                  States of the mixture

             1                                                                                       p2 = 1 bar
                                                       2                                        2 T2 = ?

                                                                                                                     s

                                                                                                                                   Figure E12.4

Assumptions:

1. The control volume shown by the dashed line on the accompanying figure operates at steady state.

2. The mixture composition remains constant as the mixture expands isentropically through the nozzle. The overall mixture
and each mixture component act as ideal gases. The state of each component is defined by the temperature and the partial
pressure of the component.

3. The change in potential energy between inlet and exit can be ignored.

Analysis:

(a) The temperature at the exit can be determined using the fact that the expansion occurs isentropically: s2  s1  0. As
there is no change in the specific entropy of the mixture between inlet and exit, Eq. 12.35 can be used to write

                                                          s2  s1  yO2 ˘sO2  yCO2 ˘sCO2  0                                                        (a)

The change in specific entropy of each component can be determined using Eq. 12.36. Thus, Eq. (a) becomes

                  yO2 c s°O21T22     s°O21T12               R ln  p2 d        yCO2 c s°CO21T22    s°CO21T12    R ln     p2 d    0
                                                                  p1                                                    p1

On rearrangement

                  yO2 s°O2 1 T2 2    yCO2 s°CO2 1 T2 2            yO2 s°O21T12    yCO2 s°CO21T12    1yO2       yCO22 R   ln   p2
                                                                                                                              p1

The sum of mole fractions equals unity, so the coefficient of the last term on the right side is 1 yO2  yCO22  1.
572 Chapter 12 Ideal Gas Mixture and Psychrometric Applications

      Introducing given data, and values of s° for O2 and CO2 at T1  700 K from Table A-23
                                                                                                                        1

                                   0.2s°O21T22  0.8s°CO21T22  0.21231.3582  0.81250.6632  8.314 ln 5
  or

                                                  0.2s°O21T22  0.8s°CO21T22  233.42 kJ/kmol # K

      To determine the temperature T2 requires an iterative approach with the above equation: A final temperature T2 is assumed,
  and the s° values for O2 and CO2 are found from Table A-23. If these two values do not satisfy the equation, another tem-
  perature is assumed. The procedure continues until the desired agreement is attained. In the present case

                      at T  510 K:                    0.21221.2062  0.81235.7002  232.80
                      at T  520 K:                    0.21221.8122  0.81236.5752  233.62

  Linear interpolation between these values gives T2  517.6 K.

  Alternative Solution:
  Alternatively, the following IT program can be used to evaluate T2 without resorting to iteration with table data. In the pro-
  gram, yO2 denotes the mole fraction of O2, p1_O2 denotes the partial pressure of O2 at state 1, s1_O2 denotes the entropy
  per mole of O2 at state 1, and so on.

      T1 = 700 // K
      p1 = 5 // bar
      p2 = 1 // bar
      yO2 = 0.2
      yCO2 = 0.8

  p1_O2 = yO2 * p1
  p1_CO2 = yCO2 * p1
  p2_O2 = yO2 * p2
  p2_CO2 = yCO2 * p2

  s1_O2 = s_TP("O2",T1,p1_O2)
  s1_CO2 = s_TP("CO2",T1,p1_CO2)
  s2_O2 = s_TP("O2", T2,p2_O2)
  s2_CO2 = s_TP("CO2", T2,p2_CO2)

  // When expressed in terms of these quantities, Eq. (a) takes the form

  yO2 * (s2_O2 ­ s1_O2) + yCO2 * (s2_CO2 ­ s1_CO2) = 0

     Using the Solve button, the result is T2  517.6 K, which agrees with the value obtained using table data. Note that IT provides
     the value of specific entropy for each component directly and does not return s° of the ideal gas tables.

 (b) The change in the specific entropy for each of the components can be determined using Eq. 12.36. For O2

                                              ˘sO2    s°O21T22    s°O21T12      R  ln  p2
                                                                                       p1

  Inserting s° values for O2 from Table A-23

                      ˘sO2  221.667  231.358  8.314 ln 10.22  3.69 kJ/kmol # K

  Similarly, with CO2 data from Table A-23

                      ˘sCO2                     s°CO21T22       s°CO21T12    R  ln  p2
                                                                                    p1

                                               236.365  250.663  8.314 ln 10.22

                                               0.92 kJ/kmol # K
                                                                         12.4 Analyzing Systems Involving Mixtures 573

  (c) Reducing the energy rate balance for the one-inlet, one-exit control volume at steady state

                                       0     h1    h2       V12      V22
                                                                  2

  where h1 and h2 are the enthalpy of the mixture, per unit mass of mixture, at the inlet and exit, respectively. Solving for V2

                                       V2  2V21  21h1  h22

  The term (h1  h2) in the expression for V2 can be evaluated as

                  h1    h2      h1     h2    1   3 yO2 1h1        h22O2      yCO21h1    h22CO2 4
                                    M        M

  where M is the apparent molecular weight of mixture, and the molar specific enthalpies of O2 and CO2 are from Table A-23.
  With Eq. 12.9, the apparent molecular weight of the mixture is

                              M  0.81442  0.21322  41.6 kg/kmol

  Then, with enthalpy values at T1  700 K and T2  517.6 K from Table A-23

            h1    h2     1    3 0.2121,184    15,3202         0.8127,125           18,4682  4
                        41.6

                       194.7 kJ/kg

  Finally,

                        m2                    kJ 1 kg # m/s2 103 N # m
                V2  Ba3 s b      2a194.7 b `                             ``           `  624 m/s
                                              kg            1N               1 kJ

   Parts (b) and (c) can be solved alternatively using IT. These parts also can be solved using a constant cp together with

      Eqs. 12.38 and 12.39. Inspection of Table A-20 shows that the specific heats of CO2 and O2 increase only slightly with
      temperature over the interval from 518 to 700 K, and so suitable constant values of cp for the components and the overall
      mixture can be readily determined. These alternative solutions are left as exercises.

   Each component experiences an entropy change as it passes from inlet to exit. The increase in entropy of the oxygen and

      the decrease in entropy of the carbon dioxide are due to an entropy transfer accompanying heat transfer from the CO2 to
      the O2 as they expand through the nozzle. However, as indicated by Eq. (a), there is no change in the entropy of the mixture
      as it expands through the nozzle.

   Note the use of unit conversion factors in the calculation of V2.

 12.4.2 Mixing of Ideal Gases

Thus far, we have considered only mixtures that have already been formed. Now let us take
up cases where ideal gas mixtures are formed by mixing gases that are initially separate.
Such mixing is irreversible because the mixture forms spontaneously, and a work input from
the surroundings would be required to separate the gases and return them to their respective
initial states. In this section, the irreversibility of mixing is demonstrated through calcula-
tions of the entropy production.

   Three factors contribute to the production of entropy in mixing processes:

1. The gases are initially at different temperatures.
2. The gases are initially at different pressures.
3. The gases are distinguishable from one another.
574 Chapter 12 Ideal Gas Mixture and Psychrometric Applications

Thermodynamics in the News...

Is Stale Airplane Air Making Us Sick?                                   rates are higher, and
                                                                        the proportion of out-
About half the air we breathe on some airplanes is fresh air,           side air is greater than
and the rest is recirculated. This has some passengers and              provided in the build-
flight attendants worried that recycled air is making them sick.        ings where the travel-
The debate rages, and the Federal Aviation Agency is listen-            ers live and work. Still,
ing closely as engineers, scientists, and health professionals          the National Academy
try to sort out the facts.                                              of Sciences and the
                                                                        American Society of
    According to a study reported in the Journal of the                 Heating, Refrigerating,
American Medical Society, while people on airplanes seem to             and Air Conditioning
get more colds, recirculating cabin air doesn't appear to make          Engineers are calling
the situation worse. Surveys show that travelers on flights with        for greater use of high-
recirculated air or on flights with fresh air report about the          grade filters that can remove virtually all of the bacteria and
same incidence of colds within a week of flying. In both cases,         fungus from the air. Such filters are already used in hospital
cold incidence is much greater than among those who have                operating room ventilation systems.
not flown recently.

    Aircraft industry sources point out that airplane air is filtered.
They claim that airplane filtration systems are better, air change

                 Entropy is produced when any of these factors is present during a mixing process. This is
                 illustrated in the next example, where different gases, initially at different temperatures and
                 pressures, are mixed.

E X A M P L E 1 2 . 5 Adiabatic Mixing at Constant Total Volume

Two rigid, insulated tanks are interconnected by a valve. Initially 0.79 kmol of nitrogen at 2 bars and 250 K fills one tank.
The other tank contains 0.21 kmol of oxygen at 1 bar and 300 K. The valve is opened and the gases are allowed to mix until
a final equilibrium state is attained. During this process, there are no heat or work interactions between the tank contents and
the surroundings. Determine (a) the final temperature of the mixture, in K, (b) the final pressure of the mixture, in atm, (c) the
amount of entropy produced in the mixing process, in kJ/K.

SOLUTION

Known: Nitrogen and oxygen, initially separate at different temperatures and pressures, are allowed to mix without heat or
work interactions with the surroundings until a final equilibrium state is attained.

Find: Determine the final temperature of the mixture, in K, the final pressure of the mixture, in bars, and the amount of
entropy produced in the mixing process, in kJ/K.

Schematic and Given Data:

                 Insulation

                 Valve                     Assumptions:

Initially 0.79 kgmol Initially 0.21 kgmol  1. The system is taken to be the nitrogen and the oxygen together.
                                           2. When separate, each of the gases behaves as an ideal gas. The final mix-
of N2 at 2 bars  of O2 at 1 bar            ture also acts as an ideal gas. Each mixture component occupies the total
  and 250°K       and 300°K                volume and exhibits the mixture temperature.
                                           3. No heat or work interactions occur with the surroundings, and there are
                                           no changes in kinetic and potential energy.

                                            Figure E12.5
                                                                                12.4 Analyzing Systems Involving Mixtures 575

Analysis:

(a) The final temperature of the mixture can be determined from an energy balance. With assumption 3, the closed system
energy balance reduces to

                                                0     0

                             ˘U  Q  W or U2  U1  0

The initial internal energy of the system, U1, equals the sum of the internal energies of the two gases when separate

                                                         U1  nN2uN2 1TN22  nO2uO2 1TO22

where TN2  250K is the initial temperature of the nitrogen and TO2  300K is the initial temperature of the oxygen. The
final internal energy of the system, U2, equals the sum of the internal energies of the two gases evaluated at the final mixture
temperature T2

                                                          U2  nN2uN2 1T22  nO2uO2 1T22

    Collecting the last three equations

                                           nN2 3 uN2 1T22  uN2 1TN22 4  nO2 3 uO21T22  uO2 1TO22 4  0

The temperature T2 can be determined using specific internal energy data from Table A-23 and an iterative procedure like
that employed in part (a) of Example 12.4. However, since the specific heats of N2 and O2 vary little over the temperature in-
terval from 250 to 300K, the solution can be conducted accurately on the basis of constant specific heats. Hence, the fore-
going equation becomes

                            nN2cv,N2 1T2  TN22  nO2cv,O21T2  TO22  0

Solving for T2

                                      T2           nN2cv,N2TN2          nO2cv,O2TO2
                                                      nN2cv,N2          nO2cv,O2

    Selecting cv values for N2 and O2 from Table A-20 at the average of the initial temperatures of the gases, 275 K, and us-
ing the respective molecular weights to convert to a molar basis

                                                   kg .743 kJ                             kJ
                     cv, N2        a28.01             ba                b       20.82
                                                kmol         kg   #  K                 kmol   #  °K

                                                   kg .656 kJ                             kJ
                     cv,O2         a32.0              ba               b    20.99
                                                kmol      kg  #   K                  kmol  #  °K

Substituting values into the expression for T2

                     10.79  kmol2  a  20.82 kJ     b  1250    K2        10.21   kmol2  a  20.99 kJ   b  1300  K2
                                      kmol # K                                            kmol # K
                T2 
                                                      kJ                                             kJ
                     10 .79 kmol2 a20.82                       b        10.21 kmol2 a20.99                    b
                                                   kmol   #  K                                 kmol      #  K

                 261°K

(b) The final mixture pressure p2 can be determined using the ideal gas equation of state, p2  nRT2V, where n is the total

number of moles of mixture and V is the total volume occupied by the mixture. The volume V is the sum of the volumes of

the two tanks, obtained with the ideal gas equation of state as follows

                                                V  nN2RTN2  nO2RTO2
                                                         pN2               pO2
576 Chapter 12 Ideal Gas Mixture and Psychrometric Applications

  where pN2  2 atm is the initial pressure of the nitrogen and pO2  1 atm is the initial pressure of the oxygen. Combining
  results and reducing

                                                             p2         1nN2  nO22 T2
                                                                     a nN2TN2  nO2TO2 b
                                                                     pN2           pO2

  Substituting values

                                                                     11.0 kmol2 1261°K2
                                       p2  10.79 kmol2 1250°K2 10.21 kmol2 1300°K2
                                                c                                                             d
                                                             2 bars                         1 bar

                                          1.62 bars

  (c) Reducing the closed system form of the entropy balance

                                                                                    0
                                                                        2 a dQ b  s
                                                           S2  S1       1 Tb

  where the entropy transfer term drops out for the adiabatic mixing process. The initial entropy of the system, S1, is the sum
  of the entropies of the gases at the respective initial states

                                                       S1  nN2sN2 1TN2, pN22  nO2sO2 1TO2, pO22

  The final entropy of the system, S2, is the sum of the entropies of the individual components, each evaluated at the final mix-
  ture temperature and the partial pressure of the component in the mixture

                                                S2  nN2sN2 1T2, yN2 p22  nO2sO2 1T2, yO2 p22

  Collecting the last three equations

                                                   s  nN2 3 sN21T2, yN2 p22  sN2 1TN2, pN22 4
                                                          nO2 3 sO2 1T2, yO2 p22  sO2 1TO2, pO22 4

  Evaluating the change in specific entropy of each gas in terms of a constant specific heat cp, this becomes

                                                   s      nN2acp,N2 ln  T2       R  ln  yN2 p2 b
                                                                        TN2              pN2

                                                             nO2acp,O2  ln  T2      R   ln  yO2 p2 b
                                                                            TO2              pO2

  The required values for cp can be found by adding R to the cv values found previously (Eq. 3.45)

                                                             kJ                                   kJ
                                         cp,N2  29.13 kmol # K               cp,O2  29.30 kmol # °K

  Since the total number of moles of mixture n  0.79  0.21  1.0, the mole fractions of the two gases are yN2  0.79 and
  yO2  0.21.

      Substituting values into the expression for  gives

                            0.79 kmol  c 29.13     kJ        ln  a 261°K b       8.314     kJ         ln  a   10.792 11.62 bars2  bd
                                                kmol              250°K                 kmol
                       s                               #  K                                    #   K             2 bars

                              0.21 kmol  c 29.30      kJ         ln  a 261°K b      8.314      kJ         ln  a  10.212 11.62 bars2   bd
                                                   kmol #             300°K                 kmol #
                                                             K                                        K          1 bar

                           5.0 kJ/ °K

   Entropy is produced when different gases, initially at different temperatures and pressures, are followed to mix.
                                                                                                    12.4 Analyzing Systems Involving Mixtures 577

   In the next example, we consider a control volume at steady state where two incoming
streams form a mixture. A single stream exits.

E X A M P L E 1 2 . 6 Adiabatic Mixing of Two Streams

At steady state, 100 m3/min of dry air at 32C and 1 bar is mixed adiabatically with a stream of oxygen (O2) at 127C and
1 bar to form a mixed stream at 47C and 1 bar. Kinetic and potential energy effects can be ignored. Determine (a) the mass
flow rates of the dry air and oxygen, in kg/min, (b) the mole fractions of the dry air and oxygen in the exiting mixture, and
(c) the time rate of entropy production, in kJ/K # min.

SOLUTION
Known: At steady state, 100 m3/min of dry air at 32C and 1 bar is mixed adiabatically with an oxygen stream at 127C
and 1 bar to form a mixed stream at 47C and 1 bar.
Find: Determine the mass flow rates of the dry air and oxygen, in kg/min, the mole fractions of the dry air and oxygen in
the exiting mixture, and the time rate of entropy production, in kJ/K # min.

Schematic and Given Data:

           Air      1         Insulation
                                              3
    T1 = 32°C
    p1 = 1 bar                                      Mixed stream
(AV)1 = 100 m3/min

T2 = 127°C                                       T3 = 47°C
p2 = 1 bar                                       p3 = 1 bar

Oxygen              2

                                                                               Figure E12.6

Assumptions:

1. The control volume identified by the dashed line on the accompanying figure operates at steady state.

2. No heat transfer occurs with the surroundings.
                                                                           #

3. Kinetic and potential energy effects can be ignored, and Wcv  0.
4. The entering gases can be regarded as ideal gases. The exiting mixture can be regarded as an ideal gas mixture.

5. The dry air is treated as a pure component.

Analysis:

(a) The mass flow rate of the dry air entering the control volume can be determined from the given volumetric flow rate (AV)1

                                                     #     1AV21
                                                    ma1     va1

where va1 is the specific volume of the air at 1. Using the ideal gas equation of state

                              1R Ma2T1           a  8314   N   #  m  b  1305  K2           m3
                                                    28.97  kg  #  K                        kg
                                  p1
                       va1                                 105 N/m2                 0.875
578 Chapter 12 Ideal Gas Mixture and Psychrometric Applications

  The mass flow rate of the dry air is then

                                                             #           100 m3/min             114.29                kg
                                                            ma1          0.875 m3/kg                                  min

      The mass flow rate of the oxygen can be determined using mass and energy rate balances. At steady state, the amounts of
  dry air and oxygen contained within the control volume do not vary. Thus, for each component individually it is necessary
  for the incoming and outgoing mass flow rates to be equal. That is

                                                                      #         #          1dry air2
                                                                     ma1       ma3         1oxygen2

                                                                      #         #
                                                                     mo2       mo3

  Using assumptions 1­3 together with the foregoing mass flow rate relations, the energy rate balance reduces to

                                             0  m# aha1T12  m# oho1T22  3 m# aha1T32  m# oho1T32 4

  where     #  and  #   denote  the  mass    flow   rates   of     the   dry  air  and  oxygen,             respectively.        The  enthalpy        of  the  mixture   at  the  exit
         ma         mo                                                                                                                                                #

  is evaluated by summing the contributions of the air and oxygen, each at the mixture temperature. Solving for mo

                                                                    #       #  c   ha1T32       ha1T12          d
                                                                   mo      ma      ho1T22       ho1T32

      The specific enthalpies can be obtained from Tables A-22 and A-23. Since Table A-23 gives enthalpy values on a molar
  basis, the molecular weight of oxygen is introduced into the denominator to convert the molar enthalpy values to a mass
  basis

                                              #         1114.29 kg /min2 1320.29 kJ/kg                             305.22 kJ/kg2
                                             mo        a 1 b 111,711 kJ/kmol                                       9,325 kJ/kmol2

                                                         32 kg/kmol

                                                           kg
                                                  23.1

                                                          min

  (b) To obtain the mole fractions of the dry air and oxygen in the exiting mixture, first convert the mass flow rates to molar
  flow rates using the respective molecular weights

                                                                #        114.29 kg/min
                                                            ma           28.97 kg/kmol
                                                    #       Ma                                          3.95       kmol /min
                                                    na

                                                                #        23.1 kg/min
                                                            mo           32 kg/kmol
                                                    #       Mo                                  0.72 kmol/min
                                                    no

         #                                                                                              #
  where n denotes molar flow rate. The molar flow rate of the mixture n is the sum

                                                    #       #        #     3.95        0.72                4.67       kmol/min
                                                    n       na       no

  The mole fractions of the air and oxygen are, respectively

                                             #                                                                     #
                                             na          3.95                                                   no         0.72
                                       ya    #           4.67        0.846          and             yo          #          4.67       0.154
                                             n                                                                  n

  (c) For the control volume at steady state, the entropy rate balance reduces to

                                0       #    1T1,   p12     m# oso1T2,    p22       3   #    1  T3,     ya  p3  2        #    so1T3,  yo p32 4     #
                                       masa                                            masa                             mo                        s

  The specific entropy of each component in the exiting ideal gas mixture is evaluated at its partial pressure in the mixture and
                                                    #

  at the mixture temperature. Solving for s

                                        #     #  3  sa1T3,  ya p32       sa1T1, p12 4            #   3  so1T3,        yo p32     so1T2, p22 4
                                       s     ma                                                 mo
                                                                                                12.5 Introducing Psychrometric Principles 579

  Since p1  p3, the specific entropy change of the dry air is

                                         sa1T3,  ya p32    sa1T1,   p12      s°a1T32      s°a1T12        R   ln  ya p3
                                                                                                         Ma       p1

                                                                             s°a1T32      s°a1T12        R   ln  ya
                                                                                                         Ma

  The s°a terms are evaluated from Table A-22. Similarly, since p2  p3, the specific entropy change of the oxygen is

                                    so1T3,     yo p32      so1T2, p22        1     3 s°o1T32    s°o1T22      R   ln  yo 4
                                                                             Mo

  The s°o terms are evaluated from Table A-23. Note the use of the molecular weights Ma and Mo in the last two equations to
  obtain the respective entropy changes on a mass basis.

      The expression for the rate of entropy production becomes

                                                                                      #
                                                                                      mo
                               #     #   c  s°a1T3  2    s°a1T12    R    ln  ya d     Mo      3 s°o1T32    s°o1T22       R ln  yo 4
                              s     ma                              Ma

  Substituting values

   #                   a114.29    kg        c 1.7669     kJ         1.71865    kJ             a 8.314      kJ    b   ln  0.846 d
  s                                    b               kg # K                kg # K            28.97     kg # K

                                  min

                         a  23.1 kg/min     b  c 207.112      kJ             213.765        kJ             a8.314        kJ         b  ln  0.154 d
                                                           kmol #                        kmol                         kmol        K
                            32 kg/kmol                              K                           #  K                           #

                       17.42  K   kJ
                                  # min

   This calculation is based on dry air modeled as a pure component (assumption 5). However, since O2 is a component of

      dry air (Table 12.1), the actual mole fraction of O2 in the exiting mixture is greater than given here.

   Entropy is produced when different gases, initially at different temperatures, are allowed to mix.

  PSYCHROMETRIC APPLICATIONS

The remainder of this chapter is concerned with the study of systems involving mixtures of                                             psychrometrics
dry air and water vapor. A condensed water phase also may be present. Knowledge of the
behavior of such systems is essential for the analysis and design of air-conditioning devices,
cooling towers, and industrial processes requiring close control of the vapor content in air.
The study of systems involving dry air and water is known as psychrometrics.

12.5 Introducing Psychrometric Principles

The object of the present section is to introduce some important definitions and principles
used in the study of systems involving of dry air and water.

 12.5.1 Moist Air

The term moist air refers to a mixture of dry air and water vapor in which the dry air is moist air
treated as if it were a pure component. As can be verified by reference to appropriate property
580 Chapter 12 Ideal Gas Mixture and Psychrometric Applications
                                                  Temperature = T
                                                                             Pressure = p

               na, ma: dry air
               nv, mv: water vapor

                 n, m: mixture

               Boundary      Volume = V      Figure 12.3 Mixture of dry air and water vapor.

               data, the overall mixture and each mixture component behave as ideal gases at the states un-
               der present consideration. Accordingly, for the applications to be considered, the ideal gas
               mixture concepts introduced previously apply directly.

                  Shown in Fig. 12.3 is a closed system consisting of moist air occupying a volume V at
               mixture pressure p and mixture temperature T. The overall mixture is assumed to obey the
               ideal gas equation of state. Thus

                                            p  nRT  m1RM2T                                                             (12.40)
                                                                                           V      V

               where n, m, and M denote the moles, mass, and molecular weight of the mixture,
               respectively, and n  mM. Each mixture component is considered to act as if it existed
               alone in the volume V at the mixture temperature T while exerting a part of the pressure.

               The mixture pressure is the sum of the partial pressures of the dry air and the water vapor:
               p  pa  pv.

                  Using the ideal gas equation of state, the partial pressures pa and pv of the dry air and
               water vapor are, respectively

                         pa         naRT    ma1RMa2T,                                         pv     nvRT    mv1RMv2T  (12.41a)
                                      V                                                                V
                                                 V                                                                V

               where na and nv denote the moles of dry air and water vapor, respectively; ma, mv, Ma, and
               Mv are the respective masses and molecular weights. The amount of water vapor present is
               normally much less than the amount of dry air. Accordingly, the values of nv, mv, and pv are
               small relative to the corresponding values of na, ma, and pa.

                  Forming ratios with Eqs. 12.40 and 12.41a, we get the following alternative expressions

               for pa and pv

                                            pa  ya p, pv  yv p                                                         (12.41b)

saturated air  where ya and yv are the mole fractions of the dry air and water vapor, respectively.
                  A typical state of water vapor in moist air is shown in Fig. 12.4. At this state, fixed by

               the partial pressure pv and the mixture temperature T, the vapor is superheated. When the
               partial pressure of the water vapor corresponds to the saturation pressure of water at the mix-
               ture temperature, pg of Fig. 12.4, the mixture is said to be saturated. Saturated air is a mixture
               of dry air and saturated water vapor. The amount of water vapor in moist air varies from zero
               in dry air to a maximum, depending on the pressure and temperature, when the mixture is
               saturated.
                                                                   12.5 Introducing Psychrometric Principles 581

T                     pg     pv

      State of the                      Mixture
    water vapor in a                  temperature
   saturated mixture
                            Typical state of the
                          water vapor in moist air

                                                   Figure 12.4 T­v diagram for water
                                           v vapor in an air­water mixture.

 12.5.2 Humidity Ratio, Relative Humidity, and
                  Mixture Enthalpy

A given moist air sample can be described in a number of ways. The mixture can be described
in terms of the moles of dry air and water vapor present or in terms of the respective mole
fractions. Alternatively, the mass of dry air and water vapor, or the respective mass fractions,
can be specified. The composition also can be indicated by means of the humidity ratio ,
defined as the ratio of the mass of the water vapor to the mass of dry air

                                        v    mv                                       (12.42) humidity ratio
                                             ma

The humidity ratio is sometimes referred to as the specific humidity.
   The humidity ratio can be expressed in terms of partial pressures and molecular weights

by solving Eqs. 12.41a for ma and mv, respectively, and substituting the resulting expressions
into Eq. 12.42 to obtain

                          v      mv     Mv pvVRT            Mvpv
                                 ma     Ma paVRT            Ma pa

Introducing pa  p  pv and noting that the ratio of the molecular weight of water to that
of dry air is approximately 0.622, this expression can be written as

                                 v      0.622       p  pv                             (12.43)
                                                        pv

   Moist air also can be described in terms of the relative humidity , defined as the ratio
of the mole fraction of water vapor yv in a given moist air sample to the mole fraction yv,sat
in a saturated moist air sample at the same mixture temperature and pressure

                                     f      yv b
                                           yv,sat T, p

Since pv  yvp and pg  yv,sat p, the relative humidity can be expressed as

                                     f     pv b                                       (12.44) relative humidity
                                           pg T, p

The pressures in this expression for the relative humidity are labeled on Fig. 12.4.
582 Chapter 12 Ideal Gas Mixture and Psychrometric Applications

                     Relative     The humidity ratio and relative humidity can be measured. For laboratory measurements
                     humidity  of humidity ratio, a hygrometer can be used in which a moist air sample is exposed to suit-
                               able chemicals until the moisture present is absorbed. The amount of water vapor is deter-
Temperature                    mined by weighing the chemicals. Continuous recording of the relative humidity can be
Sensing element                accomplished by means of transducers consisting of resistance- or capacitance-type sensors
                               whose electrical characteristics change with relative humidity.

                               EVALUATING H, U, AND S. The values of H, U, and S for moist air modeled as an ideal
                               gas mixture can be found by adding the contribution of each component at the condition at
                               which the component exists in the mixture. For example, the enthalpy H of a given moist air
                               sample is

                               H  Ha  Hv  maha  mvhv                                    (12.45)

                               Dividing by ma and introducing the humidity ratio gives the mixture enthalpy per unit mass
                               of dry air

mixture enthalpy               H     ha                            mv  hv    ha    vhv  (12.46)
                               ma                                  ma

                               The enthalpies of the dry air and water vapor appearing in Eq. 12.46 are evaluated at the
                               mixture temperature. An approach similar to that for enthalpy also applies to the evaluation
                               of the internal energy of moist air.

                                  Reference to steam table data or a Mollier diagram for water shows that the enthalpy of
                               superheated water vapor at low vapor pressures is very closely given by the saturated vapor
                               value corresponding to the given temperature. Hence, the enthalpy of the water vapor hv in
                               Eq. 12.46 can be taken as hg at the mixture temperature. That is

                                                                 hv  hg1T 2             (12.47)

                               This approach is used in the remainder of the chapter. Enthalpy data for water vapor as an
                               ideal gas from Table A-23 are not used for hv because the enthalpy datum of the ideal gas
                               tables differs from that of the steam tables. These different datums can lead to error when
                               studying systems that contain both water vapor and a liquid or solid phase of water. The
                               enthalpy of dry air, ha, can be obtained from Table A-22, however, because air is a
                               gas at all states under present consideration and is closely modeled as an ideal gas at
                               these states.

                                  When evaluating the entropy of moist air, the contribution of each component is deter-
                               mined at the mixture temperature and the partial pressure of the component in the mixture.
                               Using Eq. 6.19, it can be shown that the specific entropy of the water vapor is given by
                               sv(T, pv)  sg(T )  R ln , where sg is the specific entropy of saturated vapor at temperature
                               T from the steam tables and  is the relative humidity.

                               USING COMPUTER SOFTWARE. Property functions for moist air are listed under the
                               Properties menu of Interactive Thermodynamics: IT. Functions are included for humidity ra-
                               tio, relative humidity, specific enthalpy and entropy as well as other psychrometric properties
                               introduced later. The methods used for evaluating these functions correspond to the methods
                               discussed in this chapter, and the values returned by the computer software agree closely with
                               those obtained by hand calculations with table data. The use of IT for psychrometric evaluations
                               is illustrated in examples later in the chapter.
                                              12.5 Introducing Psychrometric Principles 583

System boundary

 Gas phase: Dry air and
               water vapor

Liquid water                 Figure 12.5 System consisting of moist air in contact
                            with liquid water.

 12.5.3 Modeling Moist Air in Equilibrium with Liquid Water

Thus far, our study of psychrometrics has been conducted as an application of the ideal gas
mixture principles introduced in the first part of this chapter. However, many systems of in-
terest are composed of a mixture of dry air and water vapor in contact with a liquid (or solid)
water phase. To study these systems requires additional considerations.

   Shown in Fig. 12.5 is a vessel containing liquid water, above which is a mixture of water
vapor and dry air. If no interactions with the surroundings are allowed, liquid will evaporate
until eventually the gas phase becomes saturated and the system attains an equilibrium state.
For many engineering applications, systems consisting of moist air in equilibrium with a
liquid water phase can be described simply and accurately with the following idealizations:

 The dry air and water vapor behave as independent ideal gases.

 The equilibrium between the liquid phase and the water vapor is not significantly
   disturbed by the presence of the air.

 The partial pressure of the water vapor equals the saturation pressure of water
   corresponding to the temperature of the mixture: pv  pg(T ).

   Similar considerations apply for systems consisting of moist air in equilibrium with a solid
water phase. The presence of the air actually alters the partial pressure of the vapor from the
saturation pressure by a small amount whose magnitude is calculated in Sec. 14.6.

 12.5.4 Evaluating the Dew Point Temperature

A significant aspect of the behavior of moist air is that partial condensation of the water va-       dew point temperature
por can occur when the temperature is reduced. This type of phenomenon is commonly en-
countered in the condensation of vapor on windowpanes and on pipes carrying cold water.
The formation of dew on grass is another familiar example.

   To study such condensation, consider a closed system consisting of a sample of moist air
that is cooled at constant pressure, as shown in Fig. 12.6. The property diagram given on
this figure locates states of the water vapor. Initially, the water vapor is superheated at state 1.
In the first part of the cooling process, both the system pressure and the composition of the
moist air would remain constant. Accordingly, since pv  yvp, the partial pressure of the wa-
ter vapor would remain constant, and the water vapor would cool at constant pv from state 1
to state d, called the dew point. The saturation temperature corresponding to pv is called the
dew point temperature. This temperature is labeled on Fig. 12.6.

   In the next part of the cooling process, the system would be cooled below the dew point
temperature and some of the water vapor initially present would condense. At the final state,
the system would consist of a gas phase of dry air and water vapor in equilibrium with a liq-
uid water phase. The vapor that remains can be regarded as saturated at the final temperature,
584 Chapter 12 Ideal Gas Mixture and Psychrometric Applications

T                                      pg1

                                               pv1 < pg1

                                       1                                  p                        Dry air and
                                                    Initial temperature                        superheated vapor
                                                                                             at the initial temper-
                                            Initial state
                                                                                                       ature
             d                         of the water vapor
                                                                                             Air and saturated vapor
                                            Dew point temperature                              at final temperature        p
                                                                                                      Condensate:
   Dew point                                   pg2 < pv1                                            saturated liquid   Final
                                                                                                 at final temperature  state
   3                                           Final temperature
       Condensate Final state 2
                   of the water vapor

                                               v                          Initial

                                                                          state

 Figure 12.6 States of water for moist air cooled at constant mixture pressure.

                state 2 of Fig. 12.6, with a partial pressure equal to the saturation pressure pg2 corresponding
                to this temperature. The condensate would be a saturated liquid at the final temperature, state 3
                of Fig. 12.6. Note that the partial pressure of the water vapor at the final state, pg2, is less than
                the initial value, pv1. Owing to condensation, the partial pressure decreases because the amount
                of water vapor present at the final state is less than at the initial state. Since the amount of
                dry air is unchanged, the mole fraction of water vapor in the moist air also decreases.

                   In the next two examples, we illustrate the use of psychrometric properties introduced
                thus far. The examples consider, respectively, cooling moist air at constant pressure and at
                constant volume.

   E X A M P L E 1 2 . 7 Cooling Moist Air at Constant Pressure

   A 1 kg sample of moist air initially at 21C, 1 bar, and 70% relative humidity is cooled to 5C while keeping the pressure
   constant. Determine (a) the initial humidity ratio, (b) the dew point temperature, in C, and (c) the amount of water vapor that
   condenses, in kg.

   SOLUTION

   Known: A 1 kg sample of moist air is cooled at a constant mixture pressure of 1 bar from 21 to 5C. The initial relative
   humidity is 70%.

   Find: Determine the initial humidity ratio, the dew point temperature, in C, and the amount of water vapor that condenses,
   in kg.

   Schematic and Given Data:

                                            T                             pg1 = 0.02487 bar

                                                                          pv1 = 0.01741 bar

   m = 1 kg                                       Condensate                  21C
   T1 = 21C                                                  Final state   Initial state of vapor
   1 = 70%                                                    of vapor    Dewpoint temperature = 15.3C
   T2 = 5C                                                                  pg2 = .00872 bar

                                                                                  5C

                                                                                      v

                                                                                                         Figure E12.7
                                                                             12.5 Introducing Psychrometric Principles 585

  Assumptions:

  1. The 1-kg sample of moist air is taken as the closed system. The system pressure remains constant at 1 bar.

  2. The gas phase can be treated as an ideal gas mixture. Each mixture component acts as an ideal gas existing alone in the
  volume occupied by the gas phase at the mixture temperature.

  3. When a liquid water phase is present, the water vapor exists as a saturated vapor at the system temperature. The liquid
  present is a saturated liquid at the system temperature.

  Analysis:

  (a) The initial humidity ratio can be evaluated from Eq. 12.43. This requires the partial pressure of the water vapor, pv1, which
  can be found from the given relative humidity and pg from Table A-2 at 70F as follows

                                     pv1  fpg  10.72 10.02487 bar2  0.01741 bar

  Inserting values in Eq. 12.43

                                     v1    0.622   a      0.2542    b    0.011  kg 1vapor2
                                                      14.7  0.2542              kg 1dry air2

  (b) The dew point temperature is the saturation temperature corresponding to the partial pressure, pv1. Interpolation in
  Table A-2 gives T  15.3C. The dew point temperature is labeled on the accompanying property diagram.

  (c) The amount of condensate, mw, equals the difference between the initial amount of water vapor in the sample, mv1, and
  the final amount of water vapor, mv2. That is

                                                      mw  mv1  mv2

      To evaluate mv1, note that the system initially consists of 1 lb of dry air and water vapor, so 1 lb  ma  mv1, where ma
  is the mass of dry air present in the sample. Since 1  mv1ma, ma  mv11. With this we get

                                           1 kg  mv1  mv1  mv1a 1  1b
                                                      v1                 v1

  Solving for mv1

                                                                  1 kg

                                                      mv1  11v12  1

  Inserting the value of 1 determined in part (a)

                                                       1 kg

                                         mv1  110.0112  1  0.0109 kg 1vapor2

     The mass of dry air present is then ma  1  0.0109  0.9891 kg (dry air).

 Next, let us evaluate mv2. With assumption 3, the partial pressure of the water vapor remaining in the system at the final

     state is the saturation pressure corresponding to 5C: pg  0.00872 bar. Accordingly, the humidity ratio after cooling is found

     from Eq. 12.43 as

                                                      .00872                     kg 1vapor2
                                         0.622  a                   b    0.0054
                                 v2              1.01325    .00872               kg  1dry  air2

  The mass of the water vapor present at the final state is then

                                 mv2  v2ma  10.00542 10.98912  0.0053 kg 1vapor2

  Finally, the amount of water vapor that condenses is

                                 mw  mv1  mv2  0.0109  0.0053  0.0056 kg 1condensate2

   The amount of water vapor present in a typical moist air mixture is considerably less than the amount of dry air present.

   At the final state, the quality of the two-phase liquid­vapor mixture of water is x  0.00530.0109  0.47 (47%). The

      relative humidity of the gas phase is 100%.
586 Chapter 12 Ideal Gas Mixture and Psychrometric Applications

    E X A M P L E 1 2 . 8 Cooling Moist Air at Constant Volume

    An air­water vapor mixture is contained in a rigid, closed vessel with a volume of 35 m3 at 1.5 bar, 120C, and   10%.
    The mixture is cooled at constant volume until its temperature is reduced to 22C. Determine (a) the dew point temperature
    corresponding to the initial state, in C, (b) the temperature at which condensation actually begins, in C, and (c) the amount
    of water condensed, in kg.

    SOLUTION
    Known: A rigid, closed tank with a volume of 35 m3 containing moist air initially at 1.5 bar, 120C, and   10% is cooled
    to 22C.
    Find: Determine the dew point temperature at the initial state, in C, the temperature at which condensation actually begins,
    in C, and the amount of water condensed, in kg.
    Schematic and Given Data:

       V = 35 m3     T
                                                                    pv1
Initially moist air
at 1.5 bar, 120°C        Dew point      1
                         temperature             T1
     = 10%
                                             Condensation
    Boundary                          1 begins

                     f2               2 g2

                                                                         v
                                                                                    Figure E12.8

Assumptions:

1. The contents of the tank are taken as a closed system. The system volume remains constant.
2. The gas phase can be treated as an ideal gas mixture. Each mixture component acts as an ideal gas existing alone in the
volume occupied by the gas phase at the mixture temperature.
3. When a liquid water phase is present, the water vapor exists as a saturated vapor at the system temperature. The liquid is
a saturated liquid at the system temperature.

Analysis:

(a) The dew point temperature at the initial state is the saturation temperature corresponding to the partial pressure pv1. With
the given relative humidity and the saturation pressure at 120C from Table A-2

                                                  pv1  f1 pg1  10.102 11.9852  0.1985 bar

Interpolating in Table A-2 gives the dew point temperature as 60C, which is the temperature condensation would begin if the
moist air were cooled at constant pressure.
(b) Whether the water exists as a vapor only, or as liquid and vapor, it occupies the full volume, which remains constant. Ac-
cordingly, since the total mass of the water present is also constant, the water undergoes the constant specific volume process
illustrated on the accompanying T­v diagram. In the process from state 1 to state 1, the water exists as a vapor only. For the
process from state 1 to state 2, the water exists as a two-phase liquid­vapor mixture. Note that pressure does not remain con-
stant during the cooling process from state 1 to state 2.

    State 1 on the T­v diagram denotes the state where the water vapor first becomes saturated. The saturation temperature
at this state is denoted as T . Cooling to a temperature less than T  would result in condensation of some of the water vapor
present. Since state 1 is a saturated vapor state, the temperature T  can be found by interpolating in Table A-2 with the specific
                                               12.5 Introducing Psychrometric Principles 587

volume of the water at this state. The specific volume of the vapor at state 1 equals the specific volume of the vapor at state 1,
which can be evaluated from the ideal gas equation

vv1    1RMv2T1         a 8314  N   #  m  b  a          393 K  N/m2 b
                          18   kg  #  K        0.1985  105
          pv1

      9.145 m3
                kg

 Interpolation in Table A-2 with vv1  vg gives T   56C. This is the temperature at which condensation begins.

     (c) The amount of condensate equals the difference between the initial and final amounts of water vapor present. The mass
     of the water vapor present initially is

                    V          35 m3
       mv1  vv1  9.145 m3/kg  3.827 kg

    The mass of water vapor present finally can be determined from the quality. At the final state, the water forms a two-phase
liquid­vapor mixture having a specific volume of 9.145 m3/kg. Using this specific volume value, the quality x2 of the
liquid­vapor mixture can be found as

x2     vv2    vf 2     9.145  1.0022  103        0.178
       vg2    vf 2     51.447  1.0022  103

where vf2 and vg2 are the saturated liquid and saturated vapor specific volumes at T2  22C, respectively.
    Using the quality together with the known total amount of water present, 3.827 kg, the mass of the water vapor contained

in the system at the final state is

            mv2  10.1782 13.8272  0.681 kg

The mass of the condensate, mw2, is then
                                               mw2  mv1  mv2  3.827  0.681  3.146 kg

 When a moist air mixture is cooled at constant mixture volume, the temperature at which condensation begins is not the

    dew point temperature corresponding to the initial state. In this case, condensation begins at 56C, but the dew point tem-

    perature at the initial state, determined in part (a), is 60C.

   No additional fundamental concepts are required for the study of closed systems involv-
ing mixtures of dry air and water vapor. Example 12.9, which builds on Example 12.8, brings
out some special features of the use of conservation of mass and conservation of energy in
analyzing this kind of system. Similar considerations can be used to study other closed systems
involving moist air.

    E X A M P L E 1 2 . 9 Evaluating Heat Transfer for Moist Air Cooling at Constant Volume

    An air­water vapor mixture is contained in a rigid, closed vessel with a volume of 35 m3 at 1.5 bar, 120C, and   10%.
    The mixture is cooled until its temperature is reduced to 22C. Determine the heat transfer during the process, in kJ.

    SOLUTION
    Known: A rigid, closed tank with a volume of 35 m3 containing moist air initially at 1.5 bar, 120C, and   10% is cooled
    to 22C.
    Find: Determine the heat transfer for the process, in kJ.
    Schematic and Given Data: See the figure for Example 12.8.
588 Chapter 12 Ideal Gas Mixture and Psychrometric Applications

  Assumptions:

  1. The contents of the tank are taken as a closed system. The system volume remains constant.
  2. The gas phase can be treated as an ideal gas mixture. Each component acts as an ideal gas existing alone in the volume
  occupied by the gas phase at the mixture temperature.
  3. When a liquid water phase is present, the water vapor exists as a saturated vapor and the liquid is a saturated liquid, each
  at the system temperature.
  4. There is no work during the cooling process and no change in kinetic or potential energy.

  Analysis: Reduction of the closed system energy balance using assumption 4 results in

                                                                   0

                                        ˘U  Q  W

  or

                                        Q  U2  U1

  where

                                                      U1  maua1  mv1uv1  maua1  mv1ug1
  and

                      U2  maua2  mv2uv2  mw2uw2  maua2  mv2ug2  mw2uf 2

  In these equations, the subscripts a, v, and w denote, respectively, dry air, water vapor, and liquid water. The specific internal

  energy of the water vapor at the initial state can be approximated as the saturated vapor value at T1. At the final state, the wa-
  ter vapor is assumed to exist as a saturated vapor, so its specific internal energy is ug at T2. The liquid water at the final state
  is saturated, so its specific internal energy is uf at T2.

      Collecting the last three equations

                          Q  ma1ua2  ua12  mv2ug2  mw2uf 2  mv1ug1

      The mass of dry air, ma, can be found using the ideal gas equation of state together with the partial pressure of the dry air
  at the initial state obtained using pv1  0.1985 bar from the solution to Example 12.8

                      ma      pa1V      3 11.5  0.19852  105 N/m2 4 135 m32

                            1RMa2 T1     1831428.97 N # m/kg # K2 1393 K2

                           40.389 kg

      Then, evaluating internal energies of dry air and water from Tables A-22 and A-2, respectively

                      Q  40.389 1210.49  281.12  0.681 12405.72  3.146 192.322  3.827 12529.32
                          2851.87  1638.28  290.44  9679.63  10,603 kJ

  The values for mv1, mv2, and mw2 are from the solution to Example 12.8.

   The first underlined term in this equation for Q is evaluated with specific internal energies from the ideal gas table for air,

      Table A-22. Steam table data are used to evaluate the second underlined term. The different datums for internal energy un-

      derlying these tables cancel because each of these two terms involves internal energy differences. Since the specific heat
      cva for dry air varies only slightly over the interval from 120 to 22C (Table A-20), the specific internal energy change of
      the dry air could be evaluated alternatively using a constant cva value. This is left as an exercise.

adiabatic-saturation   12.5.5 Evaluating Humidity Ratio Using the
temperature                             Adiabatic-Saturation Temperature

                      The humidity ratio  of an air­water vapor mixture can be determined, in principle, knowing
                      the values of three mixture properties: the pressure p, the temperature T, and the adiabatic-
                      saturation temperature Tas introduced in this section. The relationship among these quantities
                                                                          12.5 Introducing Psychrometric Principles 589

Moist air        Saturated mixture                               State of the water vapor
 p, T,                Tas, , p                              in the incoming moist air stream

   m· a                         m· a                          State of the water
   m· v                         m· v
                                                              vapor in the

                                                              exiting moist air

                                                              stream

                                                  T                               pg(Tas)

                                                  Tas

Insulation

           Makeup water --                                     State of the
                                                              makeup water
  saturated liquid at  T­ams,· v
mass flow rate = m· v                                                                                v
                                                                       (b)
            (a)

 Figure 12.7 Adiabatic saturator. (a) Schematic. (b) Process representation.

is obtained by applying conservation of mass and conservation of energy to an adiabatic sat-
uration process (see box).

   Equations 12.48 and 12.49 give the humidity ratio  in terms of the adiabatic-saturation
temperature and other quantities:

                       ha1Tas2        ha1T 2  vż 3 hg1Tas2    hf 1Tas2 4
                                        hg1T 2  hf 1Tas2
                 v                                                                            (12.48)

where hf and hg denote the enthalpies of saturated liquid water and saturated water vapor, re-
spectively, obtained from the steam tables at the indicated temperatures. The enthalpies of

the dry air ha can be obtained from the ideal gas table for air. Alternatively, ha(Tas)  ha(T ) 
cpa( Tas  T ), where cpa is an appropriate constant value for the specific heat of dry air. The
humidity ratio  appearing in Eq. 12.48 is

                                  vż    0.622  p  pg1Tas2                                     (12.49)
                                                   pg1Tas2

where pg(Tas) is the saturation pressure at the adiabatic-saturation temperature and p is the
mixture pressure.

M O D E L I N G A N A D I A BAT I C SAT U R AT I O N P R O C E S S

Figure 12.7 shows the schematic and process representations of an adiabatic saturator,
which is a two-inlet, single-exit device through which moist air passes. The device is
assumed to operate at steady state and without significant heat transfer with its sur-
roundings. An air­water vapor mixture of unknown humidity ratio  enters the adia-
batic saturator at a known pressure p and temperature T. As the mixture passes through
the device, it comes into contact with a pool of water. If the entering mixture is not
saturated (  100%), some of the water would evaporate. The energy required to
evaporate the water would come from the moist air, so the mixture temperature would
decrease as the air passes through the duct. For a sufficiently long duct, the mixture
would be saturated as it exits (  100%). Since a saturated mixture would be achieved
590 Chapter 12 Ideal Gas Mixture and Psychrometric Applications

                      without heat transfer with the surroundings, the temperature of the exiting mixture is

                      the adiabatic-saturation temperature. As indicated on Fig. 12.7, a steady flow of

                      makeup water at temperature Tas is added at the same rate at which water is evapo-
                      rated. The pressure of the mixture is assumed to remain constant as it passes through

                      the device. Equation 12.48 giving the humidity ratio  of the entering moist air in terms

                      of p, T, and Tas can be obtained by applying conservation of mass and conservation of

                      energy to the adiabatic saturator, as follows.
                                                                                                           #
                      At steady state, the mass flow rate of the dry air entering the device, ma, must equal

                      the mass flow rate of the dry air exiting. The mass flow rate of the makeup water is
                                                                                                                                       #  #
                      the difference between the exiting and entering vapor flow rates denoted by mv and mżv,

                      respectively. These flow rates are labeled on Fig. 12.7a. At steady state, the energy rate

                      balance reduces to

                      1m# aha     #         2  moist air       3 1m# vż    m# v2hw  4  makeup     1m# aha    m# vż hv2mexoitiisntgair
                                 mvhv          entering                                water

                      Several assumptions underlie this expression: Each of the two moist air streams is mod-

                      eled as an ideal gas mixture of dry air and water vapor. H# eat transfer with the sur-
                      roundings is assumed to be negligible. There is no work Wcv, and changes in kinetic
                      and potential energy are ignored.

                                                                                     #
                         Dividing by the mass flow rate of the dry air, ma, the energy rate balance can be
                      written on the basis of a unit mass of dry air passing through the device as

                               1ha          vhg  2  moist air    3 1vż       v2hf      4  makeup    1ha      vżhg2emxoitiisntgair         (12.50)
                                                    entering                              water

                      where v  m# vm# a and vż  m# vż m# a.

                         For the exiting saturated mixture, the partial pressure of the water vapor is the satu-

                      ration pressure corresponding to the adiabatic-saturation temperature, pg(Tas). Accord-
                      ingly, the humidity ratio ż can be evaluated knowing Tas and the mixture pressure p, as

                      indicated by Eq. 12.49. In writing Eq. 12.50, the specific enthalpy of the entering water

                      vapor has been evaluated as that of saturated water vapor at the temperature of the

                      incoming mixture, in accordance with Eq. 12.47. Since the exiting mixture is saturated,

                      the enthalpy of the water vapor at the exit is given by the saturated vapor value at Tas.

                      The enthalpy of the makeup water is evaluated as that of saturated liquid at Tas.
                         When Eq. 12.50 is solved for , Eq. 12.48 results. The details of the solution are

                      left as an exercise. Although derived with reference to an adiabatic saturator, the rela-

                      tionship provided by Eq. 12.48 applies generally to moist air mixtures and is not re-

                      stricted to this type of system or even to control volumes. The relationship allows the
                      humidity ratio  to be determined for any moist air mixture for which the pressure p,

                      temperature T, and adiabatic-saturation temperature Tas are known.

wet-bulb temperature  12.6 Psychrometers: Measuring the Wet-Bulb
dry-bulb temperature             and Dry-Bulb Temperatures
psychrometer
                      For moist air mixtures in the normal pressure and temperature ranges of psychrometrics, the
                      readily-measured wet-bulb temperature is an important parameter.

                          The wet-bulb temperature is read from a wet-bulb thermometer, which is an ordinary
                      liquid-in-glass thermometer whose bulb is enclosed by a wick moistened with water. The
                      term dry-bulb temperature refers simply to the temperature that would be measured by a
                      thermometer placed in the mixture. Often a wet-bulb thermometer is mounted together with
                      a dry-bulb thermometer to form an instrument called a psychrometer.
                                12.6 Psychrometers: Measuring the Wet-Bulb and Dry-Bulb Temperatures 591

Thermodynamics in the News...

How Cold is Cold?                                                are better armed to

The National Weather Service is finding better ways to help      avoid exposure that
measure our misery during cold snaps so we can avoid
weather dangers. The wind chill index, for many years based      can lead to such seri-
on a single 1945 study, was recently upgraded using new phys-
iological data and computer modeling to better reflect the       ous medical problems
perils of cold winds and freezing temperatures.
                                                                 as frostbite.
    The new wind chill index is a standardized "temperature"
that accounts for both the actual air temperature and the wind   The            improved
speed. The formula on which it is based uses measurements of
skin tissue thermal resistance and computer models of the wind   measure was devel-
patterns over the human face, together with principles of heat
transfer. Using the new index, an air temperature of 5F and a    oped by universities,
wind speed of 25 miles per hour correspond to a wind chill tem-
perature of 40F. The old index assigned a wind chill of only     international scientific
20F to the same conditions. With the new information, people
                                                                 societies, and govern-

                                                                 ment in a two-year

                                                                 effort that led to the

                                                                 new standard being

                                                                 adopted in the United States and Canada. Further upgrades

                                                                 are in the works to include the amount of cloud cover in the

                                                                 formula, since solar radiation is also an important factor in

                                                                 how cold it feels.

   The psychrometer of Fig. 12.8a is whirled in the air whose wet- and dry-bulb temperatures
are to be determined. This induces air flow over the two thermometers. For the psychrometer
of Fig. 12.8b, the air flow is induced by a battery-operated fan. In each type of psychrome-
ter, if the surrounding air is not saturated, water in the wick of the wet-bulb thermometer evap-
orates and the temperature of the remaining water falls below the dry-bulb temperature. Even-
tually a steady-state condition is attained by the wet-bulb thermometer. The wet- and dry-bulb
temperatures are then read from the respective thermometers. The wet-bulb temperature de-
pends on the rates of heat and mass transfer between the moistened wick and the air. Since
these depend in turn on the geometry of the thermometer, air velocity, supply water temper-
ature, and other factors, the wet-bulb temperature is not a mixture property.

   For moist air mixtures in the normal pressure and temperature ranges of psychrometric ap-
plications, the adiabatic saturation temperature introduced in Sec. 12.5.5 is closely approximated
by the wet-bulb temperature. Accordingly, the humidity ratio for any such mixture can be
calculated by using the wet-bulb temperature in Eqs. 12.48 and 12.49 in place of the adiabatic-
saturation temperature. Close agreement between the adiabatic-saturation and wet-bulb temper-
atures is not generally found for moist air departing from normal psychrometric conditions.

                Bearing                                          Dry-bulb
                        Handle                                   thermometer

               Dry-bulb                                                         Wet-bulb
             thermometer                                                        thermometer

  Wet-bulb                                                                                   Air in
thermometer

                                Switch                                                       Battery-
                                                                                             operated
                                                                                             fan

                                                                 Air out

Wick         (a)                        (b)

 Figure 12.8 Psychrometers. (a) Sling psychrometer. (b) Aspirating psychrometer.
592 Chapter 12 Ideal Gas Mixture and Psychrometric Applications

psychrometric chart  12.7 Psychrometric Charts

                     Graphical representations of several important properties of moist air are provided by
                     psychrometric charts. The main features of one form of chart are shown in Fig. 12.9. A
                     complete chart in SI units is given in Fig. A-9. This chart is constructed for a mixture
                     pressure of 1 atm, but charts for other mixture pressures are also available. When the mix-
                     ture pressure differs only slightly from 1 atm, Figs. A-9 remain sufficiently accurate for
                     engineering analyses. In this text, such differences are ignored.

                         Let us consider several features of the psychrometric chart:

                      Referring to Fig. 12.9, note that the abscissa gives the dry-bulb temperature and the
                        ordinate provides the humidity ratio. For charts in SI, the temperature is in C and
                         is expressed in kg, or g, of water vapor per kg of dry air.

                      Equation 12.43 shows that for fixed mixture pressure there is a direct correspondence
                        between the partial pressure of the water vapor and the humidity ratio. Accordingly, the
                        vapor pressure also can be shown on the ordinate, as illustrated on Fig. 12.9.

                      Curves of constant relative humidity are shown on psychrometric charts. On
                        Fig. 12.9, curves labeled   100, 50, and 10% are indicated. Since the dew point
                        is the state where the mixture becomes saturated when cooled at constant vapor
                        pressure, the dew point temperature corresponding to a given moist air state can be
                        determined by following a line of constant  (constant pv) to the saturation line,
                          100%. The dew point temperature and dry-bulb temperature are identical for
                        states on the saturation curve.

                      Psychrometric charts also give values of the mixture enthalpy per unit mass of dry air
                        in the mixture: ha  hv. In Fig. A-9, the mixture enthalpy has units of kJ per kg of
                        dry air. The numerical values provided on these charts are determined relative to the
                        following special reference states and reference values. In Fig. A-9, the enthalpy of the
                        dry air ha is determined relative to a zero value at 0C, and not 0 K as in Table A-22.
                        Accordingly, in place of Eq. 3.49 used to develop the enthalpy data of Tables A-22,
                        the following expression is employed to evaluate the enthalpy of the dry air for use

                     Barometric pressure = 1 atm

                                                                                = 100%

                       Scale for the               Wet-bulb and                Twb         50%         pv
                     mixture enthalpy                 dew point                            Volume
                     per unit mass of               temperature                         =
                                                        scales
                           dry air                                                         per unit
                                                   Twb
                                              Twb
                                                                                           mass of

                                                                                           dry air

                                                                                = 10%

                                                         Dry-bulb temperature
                      Figure 12.9 Psychrometric chart.
                                                          12.8 Analyzing Air-Conditioning Processes 593

on the psychrometric chart:

                                T      cpa dT  cpaT 1°C2  (12.51)

                             ha 
                             273.15 K

where cpa is a constant value for the specific heat cp of dry air and T(C) denotes
the temperature in C. In the temperature range of Fig. A-9, cpa can be taken as
1.005 kJ/kg · K. On Figs. A-9 the enthalpy of the water vapor hv is evaluated as hg at
the dry-bulb temperature of the mixture from Table A-2.

 Another important parameter on psychrometer charts is the wet-bulb temperature. As
   illustrated by Figs. A-9, constant Twb lines run from the upper left to the lower right of
   the chart. The relationship between the wet-bulb temperature and other chart quantities
   is provided by Eq. 12.48. The wet-bulb temperature can be used in this equation in
   place of the adiabatic-saturation temperature for the states of moist air located on
   Figs. A-9.

 Lines of constant wet-bulb temperature are approximately lines of constant mixture
  enthalpy per unit mass of dry air. This feature can be brought out by study of the
  energy balance for the adiabatic saturator, Eq. 12.50. Since the contribution of the
  energy entering the adiabatic saturator with the makeup water is normally much
  smaller than that of the moist air, the enthalpy of the entering moist air is very
  nearly equal to the enthalpy of the saturated mixture exiting. Accordingly, all states
  with the same value of the wet-bulb temperature (adiabatic-saturation temperature)
  have nearly the same value for the mixture enthalpy per unit mass of dry air. Al-
  though Figs. A-9 ignore this slight effect, some psychrometric charts are drawn to
  show the departure of lines of constant wet-bulb temperature from lines of constant
  mixture enthalpy.

 As shown on Fig. 12.9, psychrometric charts also provide lines representing volume per
   unit mass of dry air, Vma. Figure A-9 gives this quantity in units of m3/kg. These spe-
   cific volume lines can be interpreted as giving the volume of dry air or of water vapor,

   per unit mass of dry air, since each mixture component is considered to fill the entire

   volume.

   The psychrometric chart is easily used.  for example. . . a psychrometer indicates
that in a classroom the dry-bulb temperature is 20C and the wet-bulb temperature is 15C.
Locating the mixture state on Fig. A-9 corresponding to the intersection of these tempera-
tures, we read   0.0086 kg(vapor)/kg(dry air) and   60%. 

12.8 Analyzing Air-Conditioning Processes

The purpose of the present section is to study typical air-conditioning processes using
the psychrometric principles developed in this chapter. Specific illustrations are pro-
vided in the form of solved examples involving control volumes at steady state. In
each case, the methodology introduced in Sec. 12.8.1 is employed to arrive at the solu-
tion. To reinforce the psychrometric principles developed in the present chapter, the re-
quired psychrometric parameters are determined in most cases using tabular data provided
in the appendix. It is left as an exercise to check these values by means of a psychro-
metric chart.
594 Chapter 12 Ideal Gas Mixture and Psychrometric Applications

 12.8.1 Applying Mass and Energy Balances to
                  Air-Conditioning Systems

The object of this section is to illustrate the use of the conservation of mass and conserva-
tion of energy principles in analyzing systems involving mixtures of dry air and water vapor
in which a condensed water phase may be present. The same basic solution approach that
has been used in thermodynamic analyses considered thus far is applicable. The only new
aspect is the use of the special vocabulary and parameters of psychrometrics.

   Systems that accomplish air-conditioning processes such as heating, cooling, humidifica-
tion, or dehumidification are normally analyzed on a control volume basis. To consider a typ-
ical analysis, refer to Fig. 12.10, which shows a two-inlet, single-exit control volume at steady
state. A moist air stream enters at 1, a moist air stream exits at 2, and a water-only strea#m
enters at 3. The water-only stream may be a liquid or a vapor. Heat transfer at the rate Qcv
can occur bet#ween the control volume and its surroundings. Depending on the application,
the value of Qcv might be positive, negative, or zero.

MASS BALANCE. At steady state, the amounts of dry air and water vapor contained within

the control volume cannot vary. Thus, for each component individually it is necessary for the

total incoming and outgoing mass flow rates to be equal. That is

                                                      #                   #    1dry air2
                                                     ma1                 ma2   1water2

                                          #           #                   #
                                         mv1         mw                  mv2

                                                                                          #
For simplicity, the constant mass flow rate of the dry air is denoted by ma. The mass flow

rates of the water vapor can be expressed conveniently in terms of humidity ratios as
 #         #           #           #
mv1    v1ma      and  mv2      v2ma.  With      these               expressions,   the  mass  balance   for     water  becomes

                                          #           #          1  v2    v12      1water2                             (12.52)
                                         mw          ma

When water is added at 3, 2 is greater than 1.

                                          #
ENERGY BALANCE. Assuming Wcv  0 and ignoring all kinetic and potential energy ef-

fects, the energy rate balance reduces at steady state to

                      0     #         1   #          m# v1hv12                 #         1   #       m# v2hv22         (12.53)
                           Qcv           maha1                                mwhw          maha2

In this equation, the entering and exiting moist air streams are regarded as ideal gas mixtures

of dry air and water vapor.

Equation 12.53 can be cast into a form that is particularly convenient for the analysis of

air-conditioning systems. First, with Eq. 12.47 the enthalpies of the entering and exiting water

vapor can be evaluated as the saturated vapor enthalpies corresponding to the temperatures

T1 and T2, respectively, giving

                      0     #         1   #          m# v1hg12                 #         1   #       m# v2hg22
                           Qcv           maha1                                mwhw          maha2

Then,  with       #         #  and   #              #               the  equation   can  be  expressed  as
                 mv1    v1ma        mv2         v2ma,

                        0     #           #  1  ha1              v1hg12        #         m# a1ha2    v2hg22            (12.54)
                             Qcv         ma                                   mwhw

Moist air     1                 ·
   mm·· va1,                   Qcv Boundary

                                                   2
                                                   Moist air
                                                    m· a, m· v2

                          3                                                    Figure 12.10 System for conditioning
                 Liquid or vapor, m· w                                        moist air.
                                                                                    12.8 Analyzing Air-Conditioning Processes 595

Finally, introducing Eq. 12.52, the energy rate balance becomes

               0       #      #  3  1ha1    ha22     v1hg1    1v2          v12hw    v2hg2 4              (12.55)
                      Qcv    ma

   The first underlined term of Eq. 12.55 can be evaluated from Tables A-22 giving the ideal
gas properties of air. Alternatively, since relatively small temperature differences are nor-
mally encountered in the class of systems under present consideration, this term can be eval-
uated as ha1  ha2  cpa(T1  T2), where cpa is a constant value for the specific heat of dry
air. The second underlined term of Eq. 12.55 can be evaluated using steam table data to-
gether with known values for 1 and 2.

MODELING SUMMARY. As suggested by the foregoing development, several simplifying
assumptions are commonly used when analyzing the air-conditioning systems under present
consideration. In addition to the assumption of steady-state operation, one-dimensional flow
is assumed to apply at locations where matter crosses the boundary of the control volume,
and the effects of kinetic and potential energy at these locations are neglected. In most cases
there is no work, except for flow work where matter crosses the boundary. Further simplifi-
cations also may be required in particular cases.

 12.8.2 Conditioning Moist Air at Constant Composition

Building air-conditioning systems frequently heat or cool a moist air stream with no change
in the amount of water vapor present. In such cases the humidity ratio  remains constant,
while relative humidity and other moist air parameters vary. Example 12.10 gives an ele-
mentary illustration using the methodology of Sec. 12.8.1.

E X A M P L E 1 2 . 1 0 Heating Moist Air in a Duct

Moist air enters a duct at 10C, 80% relative humidity, and a volumetric flow rate of 150 m3/min. The mixture is heated as it
flows through the duct and exits at 30C. No moisture is added or removed, and the mixture pressure remains approximately
constant at 1 bar. For steady-state operation, determine (a) the rate of heat transfer, in kJ/min, and (b) the relative humidity
at the exit. Changes in kinetic and potential energy can be ignored.

SOLUTION
Known: Moist air that enters a duct at 10C and   80% with a volumetric flow rate of 150 m3/min is heated at constant
pressure and exits at 30C. No moisture is added or removed.

Find: Determine the rate of heat transfer, in kJ/min, and the relative humidity at the exit.

Schematic and Given Data:

               _m_3_                                          T
               min
(AV)1  =  150                     ·                                               pg(T2)        pv
                                 Qcv
T1 = 10°C

 1 = 80%                                                             T2                               2
                                                     T2 = 30°C                            pg(T1)

               1           Boundary               2           T1                             1

                                                                                                         v
                                                                                                                  Figure E12.10a
596 Chapter 12 Ideal Gas Mixture and Psychrometric Applications

  Assumptions:

  1. The control volume shown in the accompanying figure operates at steady state.
                                                                                                                  #

  2. The changes in kinetic and potential energy between inlet and exit can be ignored and Wcv  0.

  3. The entering and exiting moist air streams can be regarded as ideal gas mixtures.

  Analysis:

                                   #
  (a) The heat transfer rate Qcv can be determined from the mass and energy rate balances. At steady state, the amounts of dry
  air and water vapor contained within the control volume cannot vary. Thus, for each component individually it is necessary
  for the incoming and outgoing mass flow rates to be equal. That is

                                                               #              #         1dry air2
                                                              ma1            ma2        1water2

                                                               #              #
                                                              mv1            mv2

                                                                                                                                 ##
  For simplicity, the constant mass flow rates of the dry air and water vapor are denoted, respectively, by ma and mv. From these
  considerations, it can be concluded that the humidity ratio is the same at the inlet and exit: 1  2.

      The steady-state form of the energy rate balance reduces with assumption 2 to

                                          0     #         #0         1   #            #    v12        1    #         #   v22
                                               Qcv       Wcv            mah a1       mvh                  mah a2    mvh

  In writing this equation, the incoming and outgoing moist air streams are regarded as ideal gas mixtures of dry air and water

  vapor.            #

  Solving for Qcv

                                                     #         #  1  ha2         ha12       #   1  h  v2    hv12
                                                    Qcv       ma                           mv

  Noting  that   #        #  where    is  the  humidity     ratio,   the       expression   for        #    can     be  written  in  the  form
                mv     vma,                                                                           Qcv

                                                     #       #    3  1  ha2       ha12     v 1hv2           hv12 4                              (1)
                                                    Qcv     ma

                  #
  To evaluate Qcv from this expression requires the specific enthalpies of the dry air and water vapor at the inlet and exit, the

  mass flow rate of the dry air, and the humidity ratio.

      The specific enthalpies of the dry air are obtained from Table A-22 at the inlet and exit temperatures T1 and T2, respec-
  tively: ha1  283.1 kJ/kg, ha2  303.2 kJ/kg. The specific enthalpies of the water vapor are found using hv  hg and data from
  Table A-2 at T1 and T2, respectively: hg1  2519.8 kJ/kg, hg2  2556.3 kJ/kg.

      The mass flow rate of the dry air can be determined from the volumetric flow rate at the inlet (AV)1

                                                                         #           1AV21
                                                                        ma            va1

  In this equation, va1 is the specific volume of the dry air evaluated at T1 and the partial pressure of the dry air pa1. Using the
  ideal gas equation of state

                                                                        va1       1RM2 T1

                                                                                     pa1

  The partial pressure pa1 can be determined from the mixture pressure p and the partial pressure of the water vapor pv1: pa1 
  p  pv1. To find pv1, use the given inlet relative humidity and the saturation pressure at 10C from Table A-2

                                               pv1  f1 pg1  10.82 10.01228 bar2  0.0098 bar

  Since the mixture pressure is 1 bar, it follows that pa1  0.9902 bar. The specific volume of the dry air is then

                                                         a  8314        N   #  m  b  1283  K2
                                                            28.97       kg  #  K

                                               va1       10 .9902  105 N/m22                          0.82  m3/kg
                                                                                    12.8 Analyzing Air-Conditioning Processes 597

Using this value, the mass flow rate of the dry air is

                                                  #    150 m3/min          182.9  kg/min
                                                 ma    0 .82 m3/kg

The humidity ratio  can be found from

                                          v      0.622 a   p  pv1   b    0.622 a    0.0098   b
                                                               pv1               1   0.0098

                                                              kg 1vapor2
                                                0.00616 kg 1dry air2

    Finally, substituting values into Eq. (1) we get

                                       #
                                     Qcv  182.9 3 1303.2  283.12  10.006162 12556.3  2519.82 4

                                           3717 kJ/min

(b) The states of the water vapor at the duct inlet and exit are located on the accompanying T­v diagram. Both the
composition of the moist air and the mixture pressure remain constant, so the partial pressure of the water vapor at the
exit equals the partial pressure of the water vapor at the inlet: pv2  pv1  0.0098 bar. The relative humidity at the exit
is then

                                               f2     pv2     0.0098       0.231 123.1%2
                                                      pg2     0.04246
     where pg2 is from Table A-2 at 30C.

     Alternative Psychrometric Chart Solution: Let us consider an alternative solution using the psychrometric chart. As shown
     on the sketch of the psychrometric chart, Fig. E12.10b, the state of the moist air at the inlet is defined by 1  80% and a
     dry-bulb temperature of 10C. From the solution to part (a), we know that the humidity ratio has the same value at the exit
     as at the inlet. Accordingly, the state of the moist air at the exit is fixed by 2  1 and a dry-bulb temperature of 30C. By

 inspection of Fig. A-9, the relative humidity at the duct exit is about 23%, and thus in agreement with the result of part (b).

         The rate of heat transfer can be evaluated from the psychrometric chart using the following expression obtained by rear-

     ranging Eq. (1) of part (a) to read

                                                #      #   3 1ha    vhv22    1ha    vhv21 4        (2)
                                               Qcv    ma

                   #
    To evaluate Qcv from this expression requires values for the mixture enthalpy per unit mass of dry air (ha  hv) at the in-
let and exit. These can be determined by inspection of the psychrometric chart, Fig. A-9, as (ha  hv)1  25.7 kJ/kg (dry
air), (ha  hv)2  45.9 kJ/kg (dry air).
    Using the specific volume value va1 from the chart at the inlet state together with the given volumetric flow rate at the in-

let, the mass flow rate of the dry air is found as

                                           #           150 m3/min            185    kg1dry air2
                                          ma       0.81 m3/kg1dry air2                  min

Substituting values into the energy rate balance, Eq. (2), we get

                                           #     185  kg1dry air2   145.9    25.72       kJ  air2
                                          Qcv             min                       kg1dry

                                                3737 kJ
                                                         min

which agrees closely with the result obtained in part (a), as expected.
598 Chapter 12 Ideal Gas Mixture and Psychrometric Applications

      Mixturee=nt1h0=a0l8p%0y%         

1     2                         2 = 1

10°C  30°C

      Dry-bulb temperature

                                          Figure E12.10b

                                                               #

 The first underlined term in this equation for Qcv is evaluated with specific enthalpies from the ideal gas table for air,

    Table A-22. Steam table data are used to evaluate the second underlined term. Note that the different datums for enthalpy

    underlying these tables cancel because each of the two terms involves enthalpy differences only. Since the specific heat
    cpa for dry air varies only slightly over the interval from 10 to 30C (Table A-20), the specific enthalpy change of the dry
    air could be evaluated alternatively with cpa  1.005 kJ/kg # K.

 No water is added or removed as the moist air passes through the duct at constant pressure; accordingly, the humidity ra-

    tio  and the partial pressures pv and pa remain constant. However, because the saturation pressure increases as the tem-
    perature increases from inlet to exit, the relative humidity decreases: 2  1.

 The mixture pressure, 1 bar, differs slightly from the pressure used to construct the psychrometric chart, 1 atm. This dif-

    ference is ignored.

       12.8.3 Dehumidification

      When a moist air stream is cooled at constant mixture pressure to a temperature below its
      dew point temperature, some condensation of the water vapor initially present would occur.
      Figure 12.11 shows the schematic of a dehumidifier using this principle. Moist air enters at
      state 1 and flows across a cooling coil through which a refrigerant or chilled water circu-
      lates. Some of the water vapor initially present in the moist air condenses, and a saturated
      moist air mixture exits the dehumidifier section at state 2. Although water would condense
      at various temperatures, the condensed water is assumed to be cooled to T2 before it exits
      the dehumidifier. Since the moist air leaving the humidifier is saturated at a temperature lower
      than the temperature of the moist air entering, the moist air stream might be unsuitable for
      direct use in occupied spaces. However, by passing the stream through a following heating
      section, it can be brought to a condition most occupants would regard as comfortable. Let
      us sketch the procedure for evaluating the rates at which condensate exits and refrigerant
      circulates.

                                                                              #
      MASS BALANCE. # The mass flow rate of the condensate mw can be related to the mass flow
      rate of the dry air ma by applying conservation of mass separately for the dry air and water
      passing through the dehumidifier section. At steady state

                                          #      #                      1dry air2
                                         ma1    ma2                     1water2

                                          #      #                  #
                                         mv1    mw                 mv2
                                                                                                  12.8 Analyzing Air-Conditioning Processes 599

           Cooling                              Heating
             coil

   m· r          i           e2                    coil          3
1

Moist air                           2 = 100%                        T3 > T2
   m· a,                           T 2 < T1                         3 = 2
                                    2 <1
 T1,  1,
p = 1 atm

                                                                                          Initial dew                         1
                                                                                             point

                                                                                                                        1        

                                                                                     2                    3
                                                                          = 100%                       3

                      m· w

     Condensate ­                                                                 T2                   T3               T1
     saturated at T2
                                        (Heating section)                                 Dry-bulb temperature
(Dehumidifier section)

                                   (a)                                                              (b)

 Figure 12.11 Dehumidification. (a) Equipment schematic. (b) Psychrometric chart
representation.

                                                                       #
The common mass flow rate of the dry air is denoted as ma. Solving for the mass flow rate
of the condensate

                                                    #        #            #
                                                   mw       mv1          mv2

Introducing   #           #      and     #          #       the  amount       of  water   condensed        per    unit  mass     of
             mv1      v1ma              mv2     v2ma,

dry air passing through the device is

                                                       #
                                                      mw
                                                       #        v1       v2
                                                      ma

This expression requires the humidity ratios 1 and 2. Because no moisture is added or re-
moved in the heating section, it can be concluded from conservation of mass that 2  3,
so 3 can be used in the above equation in place of 2.

                             The   mass      flow     rate  of   the  refrigerant  through        the  cooling    coil     #  can
                                                                  #                                                     mr
ENERGY BALANCE.

be related to the mass flow rate of th# e dry air ma by means of an energy rate balance applied

to the dehumidifier section. With Wcv  0, negligible heat transfer with the surroundings,

and no significant kinetic and potential energy changes, the energy rate balance reduces at

steady state to

                0      #  1  hi    he2       1m# aha1        #        2     #           1m# aha2     #         2
                      mr                                    mv1hv1         mwhw                     mv2hv2

where hi and he denote the specific enthalpy                values       of the   refrigerant entering         and exiting the
dehumidifier section, respectively. Introducing                #             #     #          #             #                     #
                                                              mv1                 mv2     v2ma,   and      mw     (1       2)    ma
                                                                         v1ma,

             0      m# r1hi      he2      #  3  1ha1      ha22        v1hg1       v2hg2     1v1        v22hf2 4
                                         ma

where the specific enthalpies of the water vapor at 1 and 2 are evaluated at the saturated va-

por values corresponding to T1 and T2, respectively. Since the condensate is assumed to exit
as a saturated liquid at T2, hw  hf2. Solving for the refrigerant mass flow rate per unit mass
of dry air flowing through the device

                       #           1ha1      ha22         v1hg1  v2hg2            1v1     v22hf 2
                      mr                                       he  hi
                       #
                      ma
600 Chapter 12 Ideal Gas Mixture and Psychrometric Applications

                                    The accompanying psychrometric chart, Fig. 12.11b, illustrates important features of the
                                processes involved. As indicated by the chart, the moist air first cools from state 1, where
                                the temperature is T1 and the humidity ratio is 1, to state 2, where the mixture is saturated
                                (2  100%), the temperature is T2  T1, and the humidity ratio is 2  1. During the
                                subsequent heating process, the humidity ratio would remain constant, 2  3, and the
                                temperature would increase to T3. Since the states visited would not be equilibrium states,
                                these processes are indicated on the psychrometric chart by dashed lines. The example to
                                follow provides a specific illustration.

E X A M P L E 1 2 . 1 1 Dehumidifier

Moist air at 30C and 50% relative humidity enters a dehumidifier operating at steady state with a volumetric flow rate of
280 m3/min. The moist air passes over a cooling coil and water vapor condenses. Condensate exits the dehumidifier saturated
at 10C. Saturated moist air exits in a separate stream at the same temperature. There is no significant loss of energy by heat
transfer to the surroundings and pressure remains constant at 1.013 bar. Determine (a) the mass flow rate of the dry air, in
kg/min, (b) the rate at which water is condensed, in kg per kg of dry air flowing through the control volume, and (c) the
required refrigerating capacity, in tons.

SOLUTION

Known: Moist air enters a dehumidifier at 30C and 50% relative humidity with a volumetric flow rate of 280 m3/min. Con-
densate and moist air exit in separate streams at 10C.

Determine: Find the mass flow rate of the dry air, in kg/min, the rate at which water is condensed, in kg per kg of dry air,
and the required refrigerating capacity, in tons.

Schematic and Given Data:

                    Cooling coil  Heating coil

(AV)1 = 280 m3/min                Saturated                    Assumptions:
    T1 = 30°C                      mixture
     1 = 50%                                                   1. The control volume shown in the accompanying
                                    10°C                       figure operates at steady state. Changes in# kinetic and
                                                               potential energy can be neglected, and Wcv  0.
                    13                 2                       2. There is no significant heat transfer to the
                                  Control volume               surroundings.
                                                               3. The pressure remains constant throughout at
                    Condensate,                                1.013 bar.
                    saturated at                               4. At location 2, the moist air is saturated. The con-
                     T2 = 10°C                                 densate exits at location 3 as a saturated liquid at tem-
                                                               perature T2.

                                                                Figure E12.11

Analysis:

(a) At steady state, the mass flow rates of the dry air entering and exiting are equal. The common mass flow rate of the dry
air can be determined from the volumetric flow rate at the inlet

                                                   #    1AV21
                                                  ma     va1
                                                                                                      12.8 Analyzing Air-Conditioning Processes 601

  The specific volume of the dry air at inlet 1, va1, can be evaluated using the ideal gas equation of state, so

                                                                          #             1AV21
                                                                         ma
                                                                                   1RMa2 1T1pa12

  The partial pressure of the dry air pa1 can be determined from pa1  p1  pv1. Using the relative humidity at the inlet 1 and
  the saturation pressure at 30C from Table A-2

                                                   pv1  f1 pg1  10.52 10.042462  0.02123 bar

  Thus,  pa1    1.013       0.02123        0.99177      bar.      Inserting     values  into  the   expression    for   #   gives
                                                                                                                       ma

                                           #    1280 m3/min2 10.99177                  105 N/m22           319.35  kg/min
                                          ma                                          # K2 1303 K2
                                                1831428.97 N # m/kg

  (b)  Conservation    of  mass  for  the  water   requires            #         #       #    With   #         #  and       #          #  the  rate  at  which  water
                                                                      mv1       mv2     mw.         mv1    v1ma            mv2     v2ma,

  is condensed per unit mass of dry air is

                                                                                #
                                                                             mw
                                                                              #       v1      v2
                                                                             ma

       The humidity ratios 1 and 2 can be evaluated using Eq. 12.43. Thus, 1 is

                                      v1      0.622  a         pv1       b         0.622 a0.02123b       0.0133   kg1vapor2
                                                      p1        pv1                         0.99177               kg1dry air2

  Since the moist air is saturated at 10C, pv2 equals the saturation pressure at 10C: pg  0.01228 bar from Table A-2. Equa-

  tion 12.43 then gives 2  0.0076 kg(vapor)kg(dry air). With these values for 1 and 2

                                                 #       0.0133              0.0076         0.0057  kg1condensate2
                                                mw                                                    kg1dry air2
                                                 #
                                                ma

                                      #
  (c) The rate of heat transfer Qcv between the moist air stream and the refrigerant coil can be determined using an energy rate

  balance. With assumptions 1 and 2, the steady-state form of the energy rate balance reduces to

                                           0        #          1   #         m# v1hv12       #        1   #       m# v2hv22
                                                   Qcv            maha1                     mwhw         maha2

  With    #         #   #         #   and      #        1v1           v22   #   this  becomes
         mv1    v1ma,  mv2    v2ma,           mw                           ma,

                                            #         #  3  1ha2         ha12        v1hg1    v2hg2      1v1      v22 hf2 4
                                           Qcv       ma

  where the specific enthalpies of the water vapor at 1 and 2 are evaluated at the saturated vapor values corresponding to T1 and
  T2, respectively, and the specific enthalpy of the exiting condensate is evaluated as hf at T2. Selecting enthalpies from Tables A-2
  and A-22, as appropriate

                                                #
                                              Qcv  1319.352 3 1283.1  303.22  0.0133 12556.32

                                                        0.0076 12519.82  0.0057 142.012 4

                                                    11,084 kJ/min

  Since 1 ton of refrigeration equals a heat transfer rate of 211 kJ/min (Sec. 10.2), the required refrigerating capacity is 52.5 tons.

                                                                                             #

   If a psychrometric chart were used to obtain data, this expression for Qcv would be rearranged to read

                                               #         #  3  1  ha       vhv22      1ha     vhv21      1v1      v22 hw 4
                                              Qcv       ma

       The underlined terms and humidity ratios 1 and 2 would be read directly from the chart; the specific enthalpy hw would
       be obtained from Table A-2 as hf at T2.

 12.8.4 Humidification

It is often necessary to increase the moisture content of the air circulated through occupied
spaces. One way to accomplish this is to inject steam. Alternatively, liquid water can be
sprayed into the air. Both cases are shown schematically in Fig. 12.12a. The temperature of
602 Chapter 12 Ideal Gas Mixture and Psychrometric Applications

                            1                              2

                                                                                  2 T2 > T1               2  T2 < T1                   
                                                                                     2 > 1                   2 > 1
                 Moist air                                         Moist air
                  T1,  1                                          T2,  2 >  1

                  Water injected                                                        1                                   1
                 (vapor or liquid)                                                Dry-bulb temperature    Dry-bulb temperature

                                         (a)                                                 (b)                     (c)

                             Figure 12.12 Humidification. (a) Control volume. (b) Steam injected. (c) Liquid injected.

                            the moist air as it exits the humidifier depends on the condition of the water introduced.
                            When relatively high-temperature steam is injected, both the humidity ratio and the dry-bulb
                            temperature would be increased. This is illustrated by the accompanying psychrometric chart
                            of Fig. 12.12b. If liquid water was injected instead of steam, the moist air may exit the
                            humidifier with a lower temperature than at the inlet. This is illustrated in Fig. 12.12c. The
                            example to follow illustrates the case of steam injection. The case of liquid water injection
                            is considered further in the next section.

E X A M P L E 1 2 . 1 2 Steam-Spray Humidifier

Moist air with a temperature of 22C and a wet-bulb temperature of 9C enters a steam-spray humidifier. The mass flow rate
of the dry air is 90 kg/min. Saturated water vapor at 110C is injected into the mixture at a rate of 52 kg/h. There is no heat
transfer with the surroundings, and the pressure is constant throughout at 1 bar. Using the psychrometric chart, determine at
the exit (a) the humidity ratio and (b) the temperature, in C.

SOLUTION

Known: Moist air enters a humidifier at a temperature of 22C and a wet-bulb temperature of 9C. The mass flow rate of
the dry air is 90 kg/min. Saturated water vapor at 110C is injected into the mixture at a rate of 52 kg/h.
Find: Using the psychrometric chart, determine at the exit the humidity ratio and the temperature, in C.

Schematic and Given Data:

              1                             2                   Assumptions:
                                                Moist air
m· a =                                           T2 = ?         1. The control volume shown in the accompanying figure operates
90 kg/min                                        2 = ?          at steady sta#te. Changes in kinetic and potential energy can be neg-
T1 = 22°C                                                       lected and Wcv  0.
Twb = 9°C                                                       2. There is no heat transfer with the surroundings.
                                                                3. The pressure remains constant throughout at 1 bar. Figure A-9
                               3            Boundary            remains valid at this pressure.

                 Saturated water vapor                           Figure E12.12
                 at 110°C, m· st = 52 kg/h

Analysis: (a) The humidity ratio at the exit 2 can be found from mass rate balances on the dry air and water individually. Thus

                                                            #      #   1dry air2
                                                           ma1    ma2  1water2

                                               #            #      #
                                              mv1          mst    mv2
                                                                                           12.8 Analyzing Air-Conditioning Processes 603

  With   #         #  and   #         #  where   #  is  the  mass   flow  rate  of   the   air,  the  second  of  these  becomes
        mv1    v1ma,       mv2    v2ma,         ma

                                                                                #
                                                                                mst
                                                             v2          v1      #
                                                                                ma

  Using the inlet dry-bulb temperature, 22C, and the inlet wet-bulb temperature, 9C, the value of the humidity ratio 1 can be
  found by inspection of the psychrometric chart, Fig. A-9. The result is 1  0.002 kg(vapor)kg(dry air). This value should
  be verified as an exercise. Inserting values into the expression for 2

                                   v2  0.002            152 kg/h2 01 h60 min 0                        kg1vapor2
                                                                                        0.0116 kg1dry air2
                                                             90 kg/min

  (b) The temperature at the exit can be determined using an energy rate balance. With assumptions 1 and 2, the steady-state
  form of the energy rate balance reduces to a special case of Eq. 12.55. Namely

                                           0  ha1  ha2  v1hg1  1v2  v12 hg3  v2hg2                                                                 (1)

  In writing this, the specific enthalpies of the water vapor at 1 and 2 are evaluated as the respective saturated vapor values, and
  hg3 denotes the enthalpy of the saturated vapor injected into the moist air.

      Equation (1) can be rearranged in the following form suitable for use with the psychrometric chart.

                                               1ha  vhg22  1ha  vhg21  1v2  v12 hg3                                                                (2)

  The first term on the right can be obtained from Fig. A-9 at the state defined by the intersection of the inlet dry-bulb tem-

  perature, 22C, and the inlet wet-bulb temperature, 9C: 27.2 kJ/kg(dry air). The second term on the right can be evaluated
  with the known humidity ratios 1 and 2 and the value of hg3 from Table A-2: 2691.5 kJ/kg(vapor). The state at the exit is
  fixed by 2 and (ha  hg)2  53 kJ/kg(dry air). The temperature at the exit can then be read directly from the chart. The
  result is T2  23.5°C.

  Alternative Solution:                                                             #                              #
                                                                                   ma                             mst
  The  following  program  allows  T2  to  be  determined    using  IT,  where         is  denoted    as  mdota,         is  denoted  as  mdotst,  w1

  and w2 denote 1 and 2, respectively, and so on.

  // Given data
  T1 = 22 // C
  Twb1 = 9 // C
  mdota = 90 // kg/min
  p = 1 // bar
  Tst = 110 // C
  mdotst = (52 / 60) // converting kg/h to kg/min

  // Evaluate humidity ratios
  w1 = w_TTwb(T1,Twb1,p)
  w2 = w1 + (mdotst / mdota)

  // Denoting the enthalpy of moist air at state 1 by
  // h1, etc., the energy balance, Eq. (1), becomes
  0 = h1 ­ h2 + (w2 ­ w1)*hst

  // Evaluate enthalpies
  h1 = ha_Tw(T1,w1)
  h2 = ha_Tw(T2,w2)
  hst = hsat_Px("Water/Steam",psat,1)
  psat = Psat_T("Water/Steam", Tst)

  Using the Solve button, the result is T2  23.4C, which agrees closely with the values obtained above, as expected.

   A solution of Eq. (2) using data from Tables A-2 and A-22 requires an iterative (trial) procedure. The result is T2  24C,

      as can be verified.

   Note the use of special Moist Air functions listed in the Properties menu of IT.
604 Chapter 12 Ideal Gas Mixture and Psychrometric Applications

                 Water at Tw                                     Mixture enthalpy                                
                                                                   per unit mass                             2
              1               2                                      of dry air                              1

                                                                                                       2

Moist air                        T2 < T1
m· a, T1,  1                     2 > 1

                                                                                                          1

                 Soaked                                                            T2 T1
                   pad                                           Dry-bulb temperature

                         (a)                                     (b)

 Figure 12.13 Evaporative cooling. (a) Equipment schematic. (b) Psychrometric chart

representation.

 12.8.5 Evaporative Cooling

Cooling in hot, relatively dry climates can be accomplished by evaporative cooling. This in-
volves either spraying liquid water into air or forcing air through a soaked pad that is kept
replenished with water, as shown in Fig. 12.13. Owing to the low humidity of the moist air
entering at state 1, part of the injected water evaporates. The energy for evaporation is pro-
vided by the air stream, which is reduced in temperature and exits at state 2 with a lower
temperature than the entering stream. Because the incoming air is relatively dry, the addi-
tional moisture carried by the exiting moist air stream is norm#ally beneficial.

   For negligible heat transfer with the surroundings, no work Wcv, and no significant changes
in kinetic and potential energy, the steady-state forms of the mass and energy rate balances
reduce for the control volume of Fig. 12.13a to

                            1ha2  v2hg22  1v2  v12hf  1ha1  v1hg12

where hf denotes the specific enthalpy of the liquid stream entering the control volume. All
the injected water is assumed to evaporate into the moist air stream. The underlined term
accounts for the energy carried in with the injected liquid water. This term is normally much
smaller in magnitude than either of the two moist air enthalpy terms. Accordingly, the enthalpy
of the moist air varies only slightly, as illustrated on the psychrometric chart of Fig. 12.13b.
Recalling that lines of constant mixture enthalpy are closely lines of constant wet-bulb tem-
perature (Sec. 12.7), it follows that evaporative cooling takes place at a nearly constant wet-
bulb temperature.

   In the next example, we consider the analysis of an evaporative cooler.

E X A M P L E 1 2 . 1 3 Evaporative Cooler

Air at 38C and 10% relative humidity enters an evaporative cooler with a volumetric flow rate of 140 m3/min. Moist air exits
the cooler at 21C. Water is added to the soaked pad of the cooler as a liquid at 21C and evaporates fully into the moist air.
There is no heat transfer with the surroundings and the pressure is constant throughout at 1 atm. Determine (a) the mass flow
rate of the water to the soaked pad, in lb/h, and (b) the relative humidity of the moist air at the exit to the evaporative cooler.

SOLUTION

Known: Air at 38C and   10% enters an evaporative cooler with a volumetric flow rate of 140 m3/min. Moist air exits
the cooler at 21C. Water is added to the soaked pad of the cooler at 21C.
                                                                                                           12.8 Analyzing Air-Conditioning Processes 605

  Find: Determine the mass flow rate of the water to the soaked pad, in lb/h, and the relative humidity of the moist air at the
  exit of the cooler.

  Schematic and Given Data:

                                   Water at 21C                                    Assumptions:

         T1 = 38C                                               T2 = 21C           1. The control volume shown in the accompanying figure oper-
     1                                                                             ates at steady state. Changes in kinetic and potential energy can
  (AV)1  =  1104%0 m_m_i3_n                                   2
         =                                              Boundary                                          #
                                                                                   be neglected and Wcv  0.
                             1                                                     2. There is no heat transfer with the surroundings.
                             Soaked pad                                            3. The water added to the soaked pad enters as a liquid and evap-
                                                                                   orates fully into the moist air.
                                                                                   4. The pressure remains constant throughout at 1 atm.

                                                                                    Figure E12.13

  Analysis:

  (a) Applying conservation of mass to the dry air and water individually as in previous examples gives

                                                                         #          #   1v2     v12
                                                                        mw         ma

  where   #   is  the        mass  flow  rate  of  the  water  to  the  soaked     pad.  To   find      #  requires  1,     #   and  2.  These  will  now  be  evalu-
         mw                                                                                            mw                  ma,

  ated in turn.

  The humidity ratio 1 can be found from Eq. 12.43, which requires pv1, the partial pressure of the moist air entering the

  control volume. Using the given relative humidity 1 and pg at T1 from Table A-2, we have pv1  1pg1  0.0066 bar. With

  this,  1    0.00408        kg(vapor)kg(dry         air).
                                                     #
  The mass flow rate of the dry air ma can be found as in previous examples using the volumetric flow rate and specific vol-

  ume of the dry air. Thus

                                                                             #          1AV21
                                                                            ma           va1

  The specific volume of the dry air can be evaluated from the ideal gas equation of state. The result is va1  0.887 m3/kg(dry air).
  Inserting values, the mass flow rate of the dry air is

                                                         #          140 m3/min          air2           kg1dry air2
                                                        ma     0.887 m3/kg1dry                  157.8

                                                                                                           min

      To find the humidity ratio 2, reduce the steady-state forms of the mass and energy rate balances using assumption 1 to
  obtain

                                                     0      1m# aha1     #      2        #          1m# aha2     #      2
                                                                        mv1hv1          mwhw                    mv2hv2

  With the same reasoning as in previous examples, this can be expressed as

                                                        0  1ha  vhg21  1v2  v12hf  1ha  vhg22

  where hf denotes the specific enthalpy of the water entering the control volume at 21C. Solving for 2

                                                     ha1    ha2  v1 1hg1           hf2        cpa 1T1      T22  v1 1hg1         hf2
                                                              hg2  hf                                      hg2  hf
                                         v2

 where cpa  1.005 kJ/ kg # K. With hf, hg1, and hg2 from Table A-2

                                                   v2       11.0052 138  212  0.00408 12570.7  88.142

                                                                                        2451.8

                                                                 kg1vapor2
                                                         .011 kg1dry air2
606 Chapter 12 Ideal Gas Mixture and Psychrometric Applications

Substituting  values  for   #   1,  and  2  into  the  expression  for   #
                           ma,                                          mw

                                 #               kg1dry air2  `   60 min  `  d  10.011               kg1water2
                                mw       c 157.8                    1h                    0.004082 kg1dry air2

                                                     min

                                             kg1water2
                                     65.5

                                                  h

(b) The relative humidity of the moist air at the exit can be determined using Eq. 12.44. The partial pressure of the water va-
por required by this expression can be found by solving Eq. 12.43 to obtain

                                                             pv2    v2       v2p
                                                                              0.622

Inserting values

                                                    10.0112 11.01325 bars2
                                            pv2  1.011  0.6222  0.0176 bar

At 21C, the saturation pressure is 0.02487 bar. Thus, the relative humidity at the exit is

                                                       f2    0.0176          0.708 170.8%2
                                                             0.02487

 Since the underlined term in this equation is much smaller than either of the moist air enthalpies, the enthalpy of the moist

    air remains nearly constant, and thus evaporative cooling takes place at nearly constant wet-bulb temperature. This can be

    verified by locating the incoming and outgoing moist air states on the psychrometric chart.

 A constant value of the specific heat cpa has been used here to evaluate the term (ha1  ha2). As shown in previous exam-

    ples, this term can be evaluated alternatively using the ideal gas table for air.

                            12.8.6 Adiabatic Mixing of Two Moist Air Streams

                           A common process in air-conditioning systems is the mixing of moist air streams, as shown
                           in Fig. 12.14. The objective of the thermodynamic analysis of such a process is normally
                           to fix the flow rate and state of the exiting stream for specified flow rates and states of
                           each of the two inlet streams. The case of adiabatic mixing is governed by Eqs. 12.56
                           to follow.

                              The mass rate balances for the dry air and water vapor at steady state are, respectively,

                                                                    #            #       #     1dry air2        (12.56a)
                                                                   ma1          ma2     ma3    1water vapor2    (12.56b)

                                                                    #            #       #
                                                                   mv1          mv2     mv3

                           With      #         #  the      water  vapor      mass    balance  becomes
                                    mv      vma,

                                                                  #              #          #  1water vapor2
                                                              v1ma1          v2ma2      v3ma3

                                         1 m· a1, T1,  1                                  m· a3
                                                                               3          T3
                                                                                          3
                                         2 m· a2, T2,  2 Insulation
                                                                                                 Figure 12.14 Adiabatic mixing of two
                                                                                                moist air streams.
                                                                                                        12.8 Analyzing Air-Conditioning Processes 607

                  ##
   Assuming Qcv  Wcv  0 and ignoring the effects of kinetic and potential energy, the

energy rate balance reduces at steady state to

                        #   1  ha1          v1hg12        m# a21ha2      v2hg22     m# a31ha3         v3hg32             (12.56c)
                       ma1

where the enthalpies of the entering and exiting water vapor are evaluated as the saturated

vapor values at the respective dry-bulb temperatures.

If the inlet flow rates and states are known, Eqs. 12.56 are three equations in three unknowns:
 #
ma3,  v3,  and  (ha3     3hg3).             The  solution     of  these  equations  is   illustrated    by  the  next  example.

E X A M P L E 1 2 . 1 4 Adiabatic Mixing of Moist Streams

A stream consisting of 142 m3/min of moist air at a temperature of 5C and a humidity ratio of 0.002 kg(vapor)kg(dry air)
is mixed adiabatically with a second stream consisting of 425 m3/min of moist air at 24C and 50% relative humidity. The
pressure is constant throughout at 1 bar. Using the psychrometric chart, determine (a) the humidity ratio and (b) the temper-
ature of the exiting mixed stream, in C.

SOLUTION

Known: A moist air stream at 5C,   0.002 kg(vapor)kg(dry air), and a volumetric flow rate of 142 m3/min is mixed
adiabatically with a stream consisting of 425 m3/min of moist air at 24C and   50%.

Find: Determine the humidity ratio and the temperature, in C, of the mixed stream exiting the control volume.

Schematic and Given Data:

                                            1

      (AV)1 = 142 m3/min                                          Insulation                            Assumptions:
                5°C                                                                 3
      T1   =    0.002  _k_g_(_v_a_p_o_r_)_                                                  3 = ?       1. The control volume shown in the accompany-
      1    =           kg (dry air)                                                         T3 = ?      ing figure operates at steady state. Changes in ki-
                                                                                                        netic and potential energy can be neglected and
                                                  2                                                      #
                                            (AV)2 = 425 m3/min                                          Wcv  0.
                                                                                                        2. There is no heat transfer with the surroundings.
                                                T2 = 24°C                                               3. The pressure remains constant throughout at
                                                 2 = 50%                                                1 bar.

                                                                                                         Figure E12.14

Analysis:

(a) The humidity ratio 3 can be found by means of mass rate balances for the dry air and water vapor, respectively

                                                                   #        #      #           1dry air2
                                                                  ma1      ma2    ma3          1water vapor2

                                                                   #        #      #
                                                                  mv1      mv2    mv3

With        #         #    #                    #   and   #           #    the  second  of     these  balances  becomes
           mv1    v1ma1,  mv2               v2ma2,       mv3      v3ma3,

                                                                              #        #             #
                                                                          v1ma1    v2ma2         v3ma3

Solving

                                                                                      #            #
                                                                                  v1ma1        v2ma2
                                                                           v3
                                                                                            #
                                                                                         ma3

Since       #      #       #        this    can     be  expressed    as
           ma3    ma1     ma2,

                                                                           v3         #            #
                                                                                  v1ma1        v2ma2
                                                                                                #
                                                                                      #        ma2
                                                                                    ma1
608 Chapter 12 Ideal Gas Mixture and Psychrometric Applications

To     determine       3  requires  values    for  2,      #    and   #    The     mass  flow  rates   of  the  dry  air,   #   and   #    can  be  found  as  in
                                                          ma1,       ma2.                                                  ma1       ma2,

previous examples using the given volumetric flow rates

                                                              #      1AV21,           #      1AV22
                                                             ma1      va1            ma2      va2

The values of va1, and va2, and 2 are readily found from the psychrometric chart, Fig. A-9. Thus, at 1  0.002 and T1 

5C,    va1       0.79  m3/kg(dry air).    At  1820kg5(0d%ryaanidr)/Tm2in a2n4dCm#,a2va2   0.855 m3/kg(dry air) and 2             0.0094.        The  mass flow
rates  of   the  dry                   #                                                 497 kg(dry air)/min. Inserting         values into     the  expression

                       air are then ma1

for 3

                                                   10.0022 11802  10.00942 14972                           kg1vapor2
                                          v3                                                 0.0074 kg1dry air2
                                                                180  497

(b) The temperature T3 of the exiting mixed stream can be found from an energy rate balance. Reduction of the energy rate
balance using assumptions 1 and 2 gives

                                               #   1  ha    vhv21       #     1ha    vhv22      #   1ha    vhv23                                           (1)
                                              ma1                      ma2                     ma3

Solving

                                               1ha        vhv23       #    1  ha    vhv21     #   1ha      vhv22                                           (2)
                                                                     ma1               #     ma2
                                                                                      ma1
                                                                                              #
                                                                                             ma2

With (ha  hv)1  10 kJ/kg(dry air) and (ha  hv)2  47.8 kJ/kg(dry air) from Fig. A-9 and other known values

                                          1ha         vhv23       1801102  497147.82           37.7         kJ  air2
                                                                        180  497                       kg1dry

This value for the enthalpy of the moist air at the exit, together with the previously determined value for 3, fixes the state of
the exiting moist air. From inspection of Fig. A-9, T3  19C.

Alternative Solutions:

The use of the psychrometric chart facilitates the solution for T3. Without the chart, an iterative solution of Eq. (2) using
table data could be used as noted in the solution to Example 12.12. Alternatively, T3 can be determined using the following
IT program, where 2 is denoted as phi2, the volumetric flow rates at 1 and 2 are denoted as AV1 and AV2, respectively,
and so on.

// Given data
T1 = 5 // C
w1 = 0.002 // kg(vapor) / kg(dry air)
AV1 = 142 // m3/min
T2 = 24 // C
phi2 = 0.5
AV2 = 425 // m3/min

p = 1 // bar

         // Mass balances for water vapor and dry air:
         w1 * mdota1 + w2 * mdota2 = w3 * mdota3
         mdota1 + mdota2 = mdota3
         // Evaluate mass flow rates of dry air

 mdota1 = AV1 / va1

         va1 = va_Tw(T1, w1, p)
         mdota2 = AV2 / va2
         va2 = va_Tphi(T2, phi2, p)

// Determine w2
w2 = w_Tphi(T2, phi2, p)
                                                                                                                               12.9 Cooling Towers 609

    // The energy balance, Eq. (1), reads
    mdota1 * h1 + mdota2 * h2 = mdota3 * h3
    h1 = ha_Tw(T1, w1)
    h2 = ha_Tphi(T2, phi2, p)
    h3 = ha_Tw(T3, w3)
Using the Solve button, the result is T3  19.01C and 3  0.00745 kg (vapor)kg (dry air), which agree with the psychro-
metric chart solution.

 Note the use here of special Moist Air functions listed in the Properties menu of IT.

12.9 Cooling Towers

Power plants invariably discharge considerable energy to their surroundings by heat transfer
(Chap. 8). Although water drawn from a nearby river or lake can be employed to carry away
this energy, cooling towers provide an alternative in locations where sufficient cooling water
cannot be obtained from natural sources or where concerns for the environment place a limit
on the temperature at which cooling water can be returned to the surroundings. Cooling tow-
ers also are frequently employed to provide chilled water for applications other than those
involving power plants.

    Cooling towers can operate by natural or forced convection. Also they may be counterflow,
cross-flow, or a combination of these. A schematic diagram of a forced-convection, coun-
terflow cooling tower is shown in Fig. 12.15. The warm water to be cooled enters at 1 and
is sprayed from the top of the tower. The falling water usually passes through a series of baf-
fles intended to keep it broken up into fine drops to promote evaporation. Atmospheric air
drawn in at 3 by the fan flows upward, counter to the direction of the falling water droplets.

Discharged moist air
  m· a, T4, 4 >  3

           4            Warm water inlet
Fan                            T1, m· w

                      1

                       Atmospheric air
                          m· a, T3,  3

                      3

Liquid                           2 Return water
                                        m· w
                                        T2 < T1   Figure 12.15 Schematic of a
                                                 cooling tower.
                      5 Makeup
                           water
610 Chapter 12 Ideal Gas Mixture and Psychrometric Applications

                                As the two streams interact, a small fraction of the water stream evaporates into the moist
                                air, which exits at 4 with a greater humidity ratio than the incoming moist air at 3. The en-
                                ergy required for evaporation is provided mainly by the portion of the incoming water stream
                                that does not evaporate, with the result that the water exiting at 2 is at a lower temperature
                                than the water entering at 1. Since some of the incoming water is evaporated into the moist
                                air stream, an equivalent amount of makeup water is added at 5 so that the return mass flow
                                rate of the cool water equals the mass flow rate of the warm water entering at 1.

                                    For operation at steady state, mass balances for the dry air and water and an energy bal-
                                ance on the overall cooling tower provide information about cooling tower performance. In
                                applying the energy balance, heat transfer with the surroundings is usually neglected. The
                                power input to the fan of forced-convection towers also may be negligible relative to other
                                energy rates involved. The example to follow illustrates the analysis of a cooling tower us-
                                ing conservation of mass and energy together with property data for the dry air and water.

E X A M P L E 1 2 . 1 5 Power Plant Cooling Tower

Water exiting the condenser of a power plant at 38C enters a cooling tower with a mass flow rate of 4.5  107 kg/h. A stream
of cooled water is returned to the condenser from a cooling tower with a temperature of 30C and the same flow rate. Makeup
water is added in a separate stream at 20C. Atmospheric air enters the cooling tower at 25C and 35% relative humidity.
Moist air exits the tower at 35C and 90% relative humidity. Determine the mass flow rates of the dry air and the makeup
water, in kg/h. The cooling tower operates at steady state. Heat transfer with the surroundings and the fan power can each be
neglected, as can changes in kinetic and potential energy. The pressure remains constant throughout at 1 atm.

SOLUTION

Known: A liquid water stream enters a cooling tower from a condenser at 38C with a known mass flow rate. A stream of
cooled water is returned to the condenser at 30C and the same flow rate. Makeup water is added at 20C. Atmospheric air
enters the tower at 25C and   35%. Moist air exits the tower at 35C and   90%.

Find: Determine the mass flow rates of the dry air and the makeup water, in kg/h.

Schematic and Given Data:

Moist air                                                Assumptions:
        T4 = 35°C
                                                         1. The control volume shown in the accompanying figure op-
 4 4 = 90%                                               erates at steady state. Heat transfer with the surroundings can
                                                         be neg# lected, as can changes in kinetic and potential energy;
                      1  Liquid    water, T1 = 38°C      also Wcv  0.
                           m· 1 =  4.5 × 107 kg/h        2. To evaluate specific enthalpies, each liquid stream is
                                                         regarded as a saturated liquid at the corresponding specified
                   3        Atmospheric air              temperature.
                         T3 = 25°C, 3 = 35%              3. The pressure is constant throughout at 1 atm.

                 2       Liquid    water, T2 = 30°C       Figure E12.15
                           m· 2 =  4.5 × 107 kg/h
      5
Makeup water

  T5 = 20°C

Analysis: The required mass flow rates can be found from mass and energy rate balances. Mass balances for the dry air and
water individually reduce at steady state to

                                              #       #          1dry air2
                                             ma3     ma4         1water2

                          #           #       #       #      #
                         m1          m5      mv3     m2     mv4
                                                                                                                    Chapter Summary and Study Guide 611

  The  common  mass    flow    rate  of    the  dry   air  is  denoted    as   #   Since      #        #    the  second    of  these       equations   becomes
                                                                              ma.            m1       m2,

                                                                           #        #         #
                                                                          m5       mv4       mv3

  With   #         #  and   #            #
        mv3    v3ma        mv4       v4ma

                                                                           #      #  1v4       v32
                                                                          m5     ma

                                                            ##
  Accordingly, the two required mass flow rates, ma and m5, are related by this equation. Another equation relating the flow rates
  is provided by the energy rate balance.

    Reducing the energy rate balance with assumption 1 results in

                                 0          #           1m# aha3      #       2       #              #           1   #          #       2
                                           m1hw1                     mv3hv3          m5hw5          m2hw2           maha4      mv4hv4

  Evaluating the enthalpies of the water vapor as the saturated vapor values at the respective temperatures and the enthalpy of
  each liquid stream as the saturated liquid enthalpy at the respective temperature, the energy rate equation becomes

                                     0          #       1m# aha3      #       2          #           #        1   #          m# v4hg42
                                               m1hf1                 mv3hg3             m5hf5       m2hf 2       maha4

  Introducing   #      #    #     #     1  v4    v32,    #             #  and     #              #  and  solving    for     #
               m1     m2,  m5    ma                     mv3        v3ma,         mv4         v4ma                          ma

                                                  #                               #  1  hf1   hf 22
                                                 ma                              m1          v3hg3 

                                                           ha4       ha3      v4hg4                   1v4        v32 hf5

    The humidity ratios 3 and 4 required by this expression can be determined from Eq. 12.43, using the partial pressure of

  the water vapor obtained with the respective relative humidity. Thus, 3  0.00688 kg(vapor)kg(dry air) and 4  0.0327

  kg(vapor)kg(dry air).                                                                                                                       #                          #
                                                                                                                                             m1,                        ma
    With   enthalpies  from    Tables      A-2   and  A-22,     as   appropriate,       and  the  known     values  for    3,    4,     and       the  expression  for

  becomes

                        #       1308.2          298.22              14.5   1072 1159.21  125.792                             10.02582      183.962
                       ma                                      10.03272   12565.32  10.006882 12547.22

                             2.03  107 kg/h

                                                                         #
    Finally, inserting known values into the expression for m5 results in

                                            #         12.03        1072 10.0327         0.006882         5.24       105    kg/h
                                           m5

    This   expression  for   #  can     be     rearranged      to  read
                            ma

                                                 #                                #  1  hf1    hf 22
                                                ma                               m1

                                                        1ha4        v4hg42       1ha3  v3hg32            1v4        v32 hf5

    The underlined terms and 3 and 4 can be obtained by inspection of the psychrometric chart.

  Chapter Summary and Study Guide

In this chapter we have applied the principles of thermody-                             introduced for evaluating the enthalpy, internal energy, and
namics to systems involving ideal gas mixtures, including the                           entropy of a mixture by adding the contribution of each
special case of psychrometric applications involving air­water                          component at its condition in the mixture. Applications are
vapor mixtures, possibly in the presence of liquid water. Both                          considered where ideal gas mixtures undergo processes at
closed system and control volume applications are presented.                            constant composition as well as where ideal gas mixtures are
                                                                                        formed from their component gases.
   The first part of the chapter deals with general ideal gas
mixture considerations and begins by describing mixture                                    In the second part of the chapter, we study psychrometrics.
composition in terms of the mass fractions or mole fractions.                           Special terms commonly used in psychrometrics are
Two models are then introduced for the p­v­T relation of ideal                          introduced, including moist air, humidity ratio, relative
gas mixtures: the Dalton model, which includes the partial                              humidity, mixture enthalpy, and the dew point, dry-bulb, and
pressure concept, and the Amagat model. Means are also                                  wet-bulb temperatures. The psychrometric chart, which gives
612 Chapter 12 Ideal Gas Mixture and Psychrometric Applications

a graphical representation of important moist air properties,        relate pressure, volume, and temperature of ideal gas
is introduced. The principles of conservation of mass and en-          mixtures using the Dalton model, and evaluate U, H, cv,
ergy are formulated in terms of psychrometric quantities, and          cp, and S of ideal gas mixtures in terms of the mixture
typical air-conditioning applications are considered, includ-          composition and the respective contribution of each
ing dehumidification and humidification, evaporative cooling,          component.
and mixing of moist air streams. A discussion of cooling tow-
ers is also provided.                                                apply the conservation of mass and energy principles and
                                                                       the second law of thermodynamics to systems involving
   The following list provides a study guide for this chapter.         ideal gas mixtures.
When your study of the text and end-of-chapter exercises has
been completed, you should be able to                               For psychrometric applications, you should be able to

 write out the meanings of the terms listed in the margin            evaluate the humidity ratio, relative humidity, mixture
   throughout the chapter and understand each of the                   enthalpy, and dew point temperature.
   related concepts. The subset of key concepts listed below
   is particularly important.                                        use the psychrometric chart.

 describe mixture composition in terms of mass fractions             apply the conservation of mass and energy principles
   or mole fractions.                                                  and the second law of thermodynamics to analyze air-
                                                                       conditioning processes and cooling towers.

Key Engineering Concepts

mass fraction p. 559  partial pressure p. 563                       mixture enthalpy p. 582  wet-bulb temperature
mole fraction p. 559  psychrometrics p. 579                         dew point temperature       p. 590
apparent molecular    moist air p. 579
                      humidity ratio p. 581                            p. 583                psychrometric chart
   weight p. 559      relative humidity p. 581                      dry-bulb temperature        p. 592
Dalton model p. 563
                                                                       p. 590

Exercises: Things Engineers Think About

1. In an equimolar mixture of O2 and N2, are the mass fractions     8. Which do you think is most closely related to human comfort,
equal?                                                              the humidity ratio or the relative humidity?

2. Is it possible to have a two-component mixture in which the      9. How do you explain the different rates of evaporation from a
mass and mole fractions are equal?                                  dish of water in winter and summer?

3. How would you calculate the specific heat ratio, k, at 300 K     10. Why does your bathroom mirror often fog up when you
of a mixture of N2, O2, and CO2 if the molar analysis were known?   shower?

4. How would you evaluate the entropy change of a component         11. Although water vapor in air is typically a superheated vapor,
in an ideal gas mixture undergoing a process between states where   why can we use the saturated vapor value, hg(T ), to represent its
the temperature and pressure are T1, p1 and T2, p2, respectively?   enthalpy?

5. If two samples of the same gas at the same temperature and       12. Can the dry-bulb and wet-bulb temperatures be equal?
pressure were mixed adiabatically, would entropy be produced?
                                                                    13. How do you explain the water dripping from the tailpipe of
6. Which component of the fuel­air mixture in a cylinder of an      an automobile on a cold morning?
automobile engine would have the greater mass fraction?
                                                                    14. How does an automobile's windshield defroster achieve its
7. Is i#t possi#ble for a control volume operating at steady state  purpose?
with Wcv  Qcv  0 to take in a binary ideal gas mixture at tem-
perature T and pressure p and separate the mixture into compo-      15. Would you recommend an evaporative cooling system for
nents, each at T and p?                                             use in Florida? In Arizona?
                                                                   Problems: Developing Engineering Skills 613

Problems: Developing Engineering Skills

Determining Mixture Composition                                    Considering Constant-Composition Processes

12.1 Answer the following questions involving a mixture of two     12.8 A gas mixture consists of 2 kg of N2 and 3 kg of He
   gases:                                                             Determine

   (a) When would the analysis of the mixture in terms of mass        (a) the composition in terms of mass fractions.
        fractions be identical to the analysis in terms of mole       (b) the composition in terms of mole fractions.
        fractions?                                                    (c) the heat transfer, in kJ, required to increase the mixture

   (b) When would the apparent molecular weight of the mix-               temperature from 21 to 66C, while keeping the pressure
        ture equal the average of the molecular weights of the            constant.
        two gases?                                                    (d) the change in entropy of the mixture for the process of part
                                                                           (c), in kJ/K.
12.2 The molar analysis of a gas mixture at 30C, 2 bar is 40%
   N2, 50% CO2, 10% CH4. Determine                                    For parts (c) and (d), use the ideal gas model with constant
                                                                      specific heats.
   (a) the analysis in terms of mass fractions.
   (b) the partial pressure of each component, in bar.             12.9 Two kg of a mixture having an analysis on a mass basis
   (c) the volume occupied by 10 kg of mixture, in m3.                of 30% N2, 40% CO2, 30% O2 is compressed adiabatically
                                                                      from 1 bar, 300 K to 4 bar, 500 K. Determine
12.3 The molar analysis of a gas mixture at 25C, 0.1 MPa is
   60% N2, 30% CO2, 10% O2. Determine                                 (a) the work, in kJ.
                                                                      (b) the amount of entropy produced, in kJ/K.
   (a) the analysis in terms of mass fractions.
   (b) the partial pressure of each component, in MPa.             12.10 A mixture having a molar analysis of 50% CO2, 33.3%
   (c) the volume occupied by 50 kg of the mixture, in m3.            CO, and 16.7% O2 enters a compressor operating at steady
                                                                      state at 37C, 1 bar, 40 m/s with a mass flow rate of 1 kg/s
12.4 Natural gas at 23C, 1 bar enters a furnace with the              and exits at 237C, 30 m/s. The rate of heat transfer from the
   following molar analysis: 40% propane (C3H8), 40% ethane           compressor to its surroundings is 5% of the power input.
   (C2H6), 20% methane (CH4). Determine
                                                                      (a) Neglecting potential energy effects, determine the power
   (a) the analysis in terms of mass fractions.                            input to the compressor, in kW.
   (b) the partial pressure of each component, in bar.
   (c) the mass flow rate, in kg/s, for a volumetric flow rate of     (b) If the compression is polytropic, evaluate the polytropic
                                                                           exponent n and the exit pressure, in bar.
       20 m3/s.
                                                                   12.11 A mixture of 2 kg of H2 and 4 kg of N2 is compressed
12.5 A rigid vessel having a volume of 3 m3 initially contains        in a piston­cylinder assembly in a polytropic process for which
   a mixture at 21C, 1 bar consisting of 79% N2 and 21% O2 on         n  1.2. The temperature increases from 22 to 150C. Using
   a molar basis. Helium is allowed to flow into the vessel until     constant values for the specific heats, determine
   the pressure is 2 bar. If the final temperature of the mixture
   within the vessel is 27C, determine the mass, in kg, of each       (a) the heat transfer, in kJ.
   component present.                                                 (b) the entropy change, in kJ/K.

12.6 A vessel having a volume of 0.3 m3 contains a mixture at      12.12 A gas turbine receives a mixture having the following
   40C, 6.9 bar with a molar analysis of 75% O2, 25% CH4. De-         molar analysis: 10% CO2, 19% H2O, 71% N2 at 720 K,
   termine the mass of methane that would have to be added and        0.35 MPa and a volumetric flow rate of 3.2 m3/s. Products exit
   the mass of oxygen that would have to be removed, each in          the turbine at 380 K, 0.11 MPa. For adiabatic operation with
   kg, to obtain a mixture having a molar analysis of 30% O2,         negligible kinetic and potential energy effects, determine the
   70% CH4 at the same temperature and pressure.                      power developed at steady state, in kW.

12.7 A control volume operating at steady state has two en-        12.13 A gas mixture at 1500 K with the molar analysis 10%
   tering streams and a single exiting stream. A mixture with a       CO2, 20% H2O, 70% N2 enters a waste-heat boiler operating
   mass flow rate of 11.67 kg/min and a molar analysis 9% CH4,        at steady state, and exits the boiler at 600 K. A separate stream
   91% air enters at one location and is diluted by a separate        of saturated liquid water enters at 25 bar and exits as saturated
   stream of air entering at another location. The molar analysis     vapor with a negligible pressure drop. Ignoring stray heat trans-
   of the air is 21% O2, 79% N2. If the mole fraction of CH4 in       fer and kinetic and potential energy changes, determine the
   the exiting stream is required to be 5%, determine                 mass flow rate of the exiting saturated vapor, in kg per kmol
                                                                      of gas mixture.
   (a) the molar flow rate of the entering air, in kmol/min.
   (b) the mass flow rate of oxygen in the exiting stream, in      12.14 A gas mixture having a molar analysis of 60% O2 and
                                                                      40% N2 enters an insulated compressor operating at steady
        kg/min.                                                       state at 1 bar, 20C with a mass flow rate of 0.5 kg/s and is
614 Chapter 12 Ideal Gas Mixture and Psychrometric Applications

   compressed to 5.4 bar. Kinetic and potential energy effects are            sel. The partition is removed and the gases mix to obtain
   negligible. For an isentropic compressor efficiency of 78%,                a final equilibrium state.
   determine                                                             (b) Oxygen (O2) at 500 K and a molar flow rate of 0.6 kmol/s
                                                                              enters an insulated control volume operating at steady state
   (a) the temperature at the exit, in C.                                     and mixes with H2 entering as a separate stream at 300 K
   (b) the power required, in kW.                                             and a molar flow rate of 0.4 kmol/s. A single mixed stream
   (c) the rate of entropy production, in kW/K.                               exits. Kinetic and potential energy effects can be ignored.

12.15 A mixture having an analysis on a mass basis of 80% N2,         12.20 A system consists initially of nA moles of gas A at pres-
   20% CO2 enters a nozzle operating at steady state at 1000 K           sure p and temperature T and nB moles of gas B separate from
   with a velocity of 5 m/s and expands adiabatically through a          gas A but at the same pressure and temperature. The gases are
   7.5 :1 pressure ratio, exiting with a velocity of 900 m/s. De-        allowed to mix with no heat or work interactions with the sur-
   termine the isentropic nozzle efficiency.                             roundings. The final equilibrium pressure and temperature are
                                                                         p and T, respectively, and the mixing occurs with no change
12.16 A mixture having a molar analysis of 60% N2 and 40%                in total volume.
   CO2 enters an insulated compressor operating at steady state
   at 1 bar, 30C with a mass flow rate of 1 kg/s and is compressed       (a) Assuming ideal gas behavior, obtain an expression for the
   to 3 bar, 147C. Neglecting kinetic and potential energy effects,           entropy produced in terms of R, nA, and nB.
   determine
                                                                         (b) Using the result of part (a), demonstrate that the entropy
   (a) the power required, in kW.                                             produced has a positive value.
   (b) the isentropic compressor efficiency.
   (c) the rate of exergy destruction, in kW, for T0  300 K.             (c) Would entropy be produced when samples of the same gas
                                                                             at the same temperature and pressure mix? Explain.
12.17 Natural gas having a molar analysis of 60% methane
   (CH4) and 40% ethane (C2H6) enters a compressor at 340 K,          12.21 An insulated tank has two compartments connected by a
   6 bar and is compressed isothermally without internal irre-           valve. Initially, one compartment contains 0.7 kg of CO2 at
   versibilities to 20 bar. The compressor operates at steady state,     500 K, 6.0 bar and the other contains 0.3 kg of N2 at 300 K,
   and kinetic and potential energy effects are negligible.              6.0 bar. The valve is opened and the gases are allowed to mix
                                                                         until equilibrium is achieved. Determine
   (a) Assuming ideal gas behavior, determine for the compres-
        sor the work and heat transfer, each in kJ per kmol of mix-      (a) the final temperature, in K.
        ture flowing.                                                    (b) the final pressure, in bar.
                                                                         (c) the amount of entropy produced, in kJ/K.
   (b) Compare with the values for work and heat transfer, re-
        spectively, determined assuming ideal solution behavior       12.22 A rigid insulated tank has two compartments. Initially
        (Sec. 11.9.5). For the pure components at 340 K:                 one contains 0.5 kmol of carbon dioxide (CO2) at 27C, 2 bar
                                                                         and the other contains 1 kmol of oxygen (O2) at 152C, 5 bar.
         h (kJ/kg)       s (kJ/kg # K)                                   The gases are allowed to mix while 500 kJ of energy are added
                                                                         by electrical work. Determine
         6 bar   20 bar  6 bar    20 bar
                                                                         (a) the final temperature, in C.
Methane  715.33  704.40  10.9763  10.3275                                (b) the final pressure, in bar.
Ethane   462.39  439.13   7.3493   6.9680                                (c) the change in exergy, in kJ, for T0  20C.
                                                                         (d) the exergy destruction, in kJ.
Forming Mixtures
                                                                      12.23 Air at 40C, 1 atm and a volumetric flow rate of
12.18 One kilogram of argon at 27C, 1 bar is contained in a              50 m3/min enters an insulated control volume operating at
   rigid tank connected by a valve to another rigid tank contain-        steady state and mixes with helium entering as a separate
   ing 0.8 kg of O2 at 127C, 5 bar. The valve is opened, and the         stream at 100C, 1 atm and a volumetric flow rate of 20 m3/min.
   gases are allowed to mix, achieving an equilibrium state at           A single mixed stream exits at 1 atm. Ignoring kinetic and po-
   87C. Determine                                                        tential energy effects, determine for the control volume

   (a) the volume of each tank, in m3.                                   (a) the temperature of the exiting mixture, in C.
   (b) the final pressure, in bar.                                       (b) the rate of entropy production, in kW/K.
   (c) the heat transfer to or from the gases during the process,
                                                                      12.24 Air at 77C, 1 bar, and a molar flow rate of 0.1 kmol/s
       in kJ.                                                            enters an insulated mixing chamber operating at steady state
   (d) the entropy change of each gas, in kJ/K.                          and mixes with water vapor entering at 277C, 1 bar, and a
                                                                         molar flow rate of 0.3 kmol/s. The mixture exits at 1 bar.
12.19 Using the ideal gas model with constant specific heats,            Kinetic and potential energy effects can be ignored. For the
   determine the mixture temperature, in K, for each of two cases:       chamber, determine

   (a) Initially, 0.6 kmol of O2 at 500 K is separated by a parti-       (a) the temperature of the exiting mixture, in C.
        tion from 0.4 kmol of H2 at 300 K in a rigid insulated ves-      (b) the rate of entropy production, in kW/K.
                                                                                    Problems: Developing Engineering Skills 615

12.25 Helium at 400 K, 1 bar enters an insulated mixing cham-         12.33 Wet grain at 20C containing 40% moisture by mass en-
   ber operating at steady state, where it mixes with argon enter-       ters a dryer operating at steady state. Dry air enters the dryer
   ing at 300 K, 1 bar. The mixture exits at a pressure of 1 bar.        at 90C, 1 atm at a rate of 15 kg per kg of wet grain entering.
   If the argon mass flow rate is x times that of helium, plot           Moist air exits the dryer at 38C, 1 atm, and 52% relative hu-
   versus x                                                              midity. For the grain exiting the dryer, determine the percent
                                                                         moisture by mass.
   (a) the exit temperature, in K.
   (b) the rate of exergy destruction within the chamber, in kJ       12.34 Figure P12.34 shows a spray dryer operating at steady
                                                                         state. The mixture of liquid water and suspended solid parti-
        per kg of helium entering.                                       cles entering through the spray head contains 30% solid matter
                                                                         by mass. Dry air enters at 177C, 1 atm, and moist air exits
   Kinetic and potential energy effects can be ignored. Let T0           at 85C, 1 atm, and 21% relative humidity with a volumetric
   300 K.                                                                flow rate of 310 m3/min. The dried particles exit separately.
                                                                         Determine
12.26 An insulated, rigid tank initially contains 1 kmol of argon
   (Ar) at 300 K, 1 bar. The tank is connected by a valve to a           (a) the volumetric flow rate of the entering dry air, in m3/min.
   large vessel containing nitrogen (N2) at 500 K, 4 bar. A quan-        (b) the rate that dried particles exit, in kg/min.
   tity of nitrogen flows into the tank, forming an argon-nitrogen
   mixture at temperature T and pressure p. Plot T, in K, and p,      Solid-liquid          Moist air
   in bar, versus the amount of N2 within the tank, in kmol.          mixture               310 m3/min,
                                                                      70% liquid            85°C,
12.27 A stream of air (21% O2 and 79% N2 on a molar basis)            30% solid
   at 300 K and 0.1 MPa is to be separated into pure oxygen and                             1 atm,
   nitrogen streams, each at 300 K and 0.1 MPa. A device to                                  = 21%
   achieve the separation is claimed to require a work input at
   steady state of 1200 kJ per kmol of air. Heat transfer between                 Dry air,  Dried
   the device and its surroundings occurs at 300 K. Ignoring ki-                  177°C,    particles
   netic and potential energy effects, evaluate whether the work                  1 atm
   value can be as claimed.
                                                                       Figure P12.34
12.28 A device is being designed to separate into components
   a natural gas consisting of CH4 and C2H6 in which the mole         12.35 A system consisting initially of 0.5 m3 of air at 35C,
   fraction of C2H6, denoted by y, may vary from 0.05 to 0.50.           1 bar, and 70% relative humidity is cooled at constant pres-
   The device will receive natural gas at 20C, 1 atm with a vol-         sure to 29C. Determine the work and heat transfer for the
   umetric flow rate of 100 m3/s. Separate streams of CH4 and            process, each in kJ.
   C2H6 will exit, each at 20C, 1 atm. Heat transfer between the
   device and its surroundings occurs at 20C. Ignoring kinetic        12.36 A closed, rigid tank having a volume of 3 m3 initially
   and potential energy effects, plot versus y the minimum theo-         contains air at 100C, 4.4 bar, and 40% relative humidity. De-
   retical work input required at steady state, in kW.                   termine the heat transfer, in kJ, if the tank contents are cooled
                                                                         to (a) 80C, (b) 20C.
Exploring Psychrometric Principles
                                                                      12.37 A closed, rigid tank initially contains 0.5 m3 of moist air
12.29 A water pipe at 5C runs above ground between two                   in equilibrium with 0.1 m3 of liquid water at 80C and 0.1 MPa.
   buildings. The surrounding air is at 35C. What is the maxi-           If the tank contents are heated to 200C, determine
   mum relative humidity the air can have before condensation
   occurs on the pipe?                                                   (a) the final pressure, in MPa.
                                                                         (b) the heat transfer, in kJ.
12.30 On entering a dwelling maintained at 20C from the out-
   doors where the temperature is 10C, a person's eye-glasses         12.38 Combustion products with the molar analysis of 10%
   are observed not to become fogged. A humidity gauge indi-             CO2, 20% H2O, 70% N2 enter an engine's exhaust pipe at
   cates that the relative humidity in the dwelling is 55%. Can          1000F, 1 atm and are cooled as they pass through the pipe,
   this reading be correct? Provide supporting calculations.             exiting at 100F, 1 atm. Determine the heat transfer at steady
                                                                         state, in Btu per lb of entering mixture.
12.31 A fixed amount of moist air initially at 1 bar and a relative
   humidity of 60% is compressed isothermally until condensa-         12.39 Air at 35C, 3 bar, 30% relative humidity, and a velocity
   tion of water begins. Determine the pressure of the mixture at        of 50 m /s expands isentropically through a nozzle. Determine
   the onset of condensation, in bar. Repeat if the initial relative     the lowest exit pressure, in bar, that can be attained without
   humidity is 90%.                                                      condensation. For this exit pressure, determine the exit veloc-
                                                                         ity, in m/s. The nozzle operates at steady state and without sig-
12.32 A vessel whose volume is 0.5 m3 initially contains dry             nificant potential energy effects.
   air at 0.2 MPa and 20C. Water is added to the vessel until the
   air is saturated at 20C. Determine the

   (a) mass of water added, in kg.
   (b) final pressure in the vessel, in bar.
616 Chapter 12 Ideal Gas Mixture and Psychrometric Applications

12.40 A closed, rigid tank having a volume of 1 m3 contains a           Considering Air-Conditioning Applications
   mixture of carbon dioxide (CO2) and water vapor at 75C. The
   respective masses are 12.3 kg of carbon dioxide and 0.5 kg of        12.47 Each case listed gives the dry-bulb temperature and
   water vapor. If the tank contents are cooled to 20C, determine          relative humidity of the moist-air stream entering an air-
   the heat transfer, in kJ, assuming ideal gas behavior.                  conditioning system: (a) 30C, 40%, (b) 17C, 60%, (c) 25C,
                                                                           70%, (d) 15C, 40%, (e) 27C, 30%. The condition of the
12.41 Moist air at 20C, 1.05 bar, 85% relative humidity and a              moist-air stream exiting the system must satisfy these cons-
   volumetric flow rate of 0.3 m3/s enters a well-insulated com-           traints: 22  Tdb  27C, 40    60%. In each case, de-
   pressor operating at steady state. If moist air exits at 100C,          velop a schematic of equipment and processes from Sec. 12.9
   2.0 bar, determine                                                      that would achieve the desired result. Sketch the processes on
                                                                           a psychrometric chart.
   (a) the relative humidity at the exit.
   (b) the power input, in kW.                                          12.48 Moist air enters an air-conditioning system as shown in
   (c) the rate of entropy production, in kW/K.                            Fig. 12.11 at 26C,   80% and a volumetric flow rate of
                                                                           0.47 m3/s. At the exit of the heating section the moist air is at
12.42 Moist air at 20C, 1 atm, 43% relative humidity and a                 26C,   50%. For operation at steady state, and neglecting
   volumetric flow rate of 900 m3/h enters a control volume at             kinetic and potential energy effects, determine
   steady state and flows along a surface maintained at 65C,
   through which heat transfer occurs. Liquid water at 20C is in-          (a) the rate energy is removed by heat transfer in the dehu-
   jected at a rate of 5 kg/h and# evaporates into the flowing stream.          midifier section, in tons.
   For the control volume, Wcv  0, and kinetic and potential
   energy effects are negligible. Moist air exits at 32C, 1 atm.           (b) the rate energy is added by heat transfer in the heating sec-
   Determine                                                                    tion, in kW.

   (a) the rate of heat transfer, in kW.                                12.49 Air at 35C, 1 atm, and 50% relative humidity enters a
   (b) the rate of entropy production, in kW/K.                            dehumidifier operating at steady state. Saturated moist air and
                                                                           condensate exit in separate streams, each at 15C. Neglecting
12.43 Using the psychrometric chart, Fig. A-9, determine                   kinetic and potential energy effects, determine

   (a) the relative humidity, the humidity ratio, and the specific         (a) the heat transfer from the moist air, in kJ per kg of dry air.
        enthalpy of the mixture, in kJ per kg of dry air, corre-           (b) the amount of water condensed, in kg per kg of dry air.
        sponding to dry-bulb and wet-bulb temperatures of 30 and           (c) Check your answers using data from the psychrometric chart.
        25C, respectively.                                                 (d) Check your answers using Interactive Thermodynamics: IT.

   (b) the humidity ratio, mixture specific enthalpy, and wet-bulb      12.50 An air conditioner operating at steady state takes in moist
        temperature corresponding to a dry-bulb temperature of             air at 28C, 1 bar, and 70% relative humidity. The moist air
        30C and 60% relative humidity.                                     first passes over a cooling coil in the dehumidifier unit and
                                                                           some water vapor is condensed. The rate of heat transfer be-
   (c) the dew point temperature corresponding to dry-bulb and             tween the moist air and the cooling coil is 11 tons. Saturated
       wet-bulb temperatures of 30 and 20C, respectively.                  moist air and condensate streams exit the dehumidifier unit at
                                                                           the same temperature. The moist air then passes through a heat-
   (d) Repeat parts (a)­(c) using Interactive Thermodynamics:              ing unit, exiting at 24C, 1 bar, and 40% relative humidity. Ne-
        IT.                                                                glecting kinetic and potential energy effects, determine

12.44 A fixed amount of air initially at 52C, 1 atm, and 10%               (a) the temperature of the moist air exiting the dehumidifer
   relative humidity is cooled at constant pressure to 15C. Us-                 unit, in C.
   ing the psychrometric chart, determine whether condensation
   occurs. If so, evaluate the amount of water condensed, in kg            (b) the volumetric flow rate of the air entering the air condi-
   per kg of dry air. If there is no condensation, determine the                tioner, in m3/min.
   relative humidity at the final state.
                                                                           (c) the rate water is condensed, in kg/min.
12.45 A fan within an insulated duct delivers moist air at the             (d) the rate of heat transfer to the air passing through the heat-
   duct exit at 22C, 60% relative humidity, and a volumetric flow
   rate of 0.5 m3/s. At steady state, the power input to the fan is             ing unit, in kW.
   1.3 kW. Using the psychrometric chart, determine the temper-
   ature and relative humidity at the duct inlet.                       12.51 An air-conditioning system consists of a spray section
                                                                           followed by a reheater. Moist air at 32C and   77% enters
12.46 The mixture enthalpy per unit mass of dry air, in kJ/kg(a),          the system and passes through a water spray, leaving the spray
   represented on Fig. A-9 can be approximated closely from the            section cooled and saturated with water. The moist air is then
   expression                                                              heated to 25C and   45% with no change in the amount
                                                                           of water vapor present. For operation at steady state, determine
           H
               1.005 T 1°C2  v32501.7  1.82 T 1°C2 4                       (a) the temperature of the moist air leaving the spray section,
                                                                                in C.
          ma
                                                                           (b) the change the amount of water vapor contained in the moist
   Noting all significant assumptions, develop the expression.                  air passing through the system, in kg per kg of dry air.

                                                                           Locate the principal states on a psychrometric chart.
                                                                    Problems: Developing Engineering Skills 617

12.52 At steady state, moist air is to be supplied to a classroom   12.57 Atmospheric air having dry-bulb and wet-bulb tempera-
   at a specified volumetric flow rate and temperature T. Air is       tures of 33 and 29C, respectively, enters a well-insulated
   removed from the classroom in a separate stream at a temper-        chamber operating at steady state and mixes with air entering
   ature of 27C and 50% relative humidity. Moisture is added to        with dry-bulb and wet-bulb temperatures of 16 and 12C,
   the air in the room from the occupants at a rate of 4.5 kg/h.       respectively. The volumetric flow rate of the lower tempera-
   The moisture can be regarded as saturated vapor at 33C. Heat        ture stream is three times that of the other stream. A single
   transfer into the occupied space from all sources is estimated      mixed stream exits. The pressure is constant throughout at
   to occur at a rate of 34,000 kJ/h. The pressure remains uni-        1 atm. Neglecting kinetic and potential energy effects, deter-
   form at 1 atm.                                                      mine for the exiting stream

   (a) For a supply air volumetric flow rate of 40 m3/min, deter-      (a) the relative humidity.
        mine the supply air temperature T, in C, and the relative      (b) the temperature, in C.
        humidity.
                                                                    12.58 Air at 30C, 1 bar, 50% relative humidity enters an in-
   (b) Plot the supply air temperature, in C, and relative hu-         sulated chamber operating at steady state with a mass flow rate
        midity, each versus the supply air volumetric flow rate        of 3 kg/min and mixes with a saturated moist air stream en-
        ranging from 35 to 90 m3/min.                                  tering at 5C, 1 bar with a mass flow rate of 5 kg/min. A sin-
                                                                       gle mixed stream exits at 1 bar. Determine
12.53 Air at 35C, 1 bar, and 10% relative humidity enters
   an evaporative cooler operating at steady state. The volu-          (a) the relative humidity and temperature, in C, of the exit-
   metric flow rate of the incoming air is 50 m3/min. Liquid                ing stream.
   water at 20C enters the cooler and fully evaporates. Moist
   air exits the cooler at 25C, 1 bar. If there is no significant      (b) the rate of exergy destruction, in kW, for T0  20C.
   heat transfer between the device and its surroundings,
                                                                       Neglect kinetic and potential energy effects.
   determine
                                                                    Analyzing Cooling Towers
   (a) the rate at which liquid enters, in kg/min.
   (b) the relative humidity at the exit.                           12.59 In the condenser of a power plant, energy is discharged
   (c) the rate of exergy destruction, in kJ/min, for T0  20C.         by heat transfer at a rate of 836 MW to cooling water that ex-
   Neglect kinetic and potential energy effects.                       its the condenser at 40C into a cooling tower. Cooled water
                                                                       at 20C is returned to the condenser. Atmospheric air enters
12.54 Using Eqs. 12.56b and 12.56c, show that                          the tower at 25C, 1 atm, 35% relative humidity. Moist air ex-
                                                                       its at 35C, 1 atm, 90% relative humidity. Makeup water is
 #     v3    v2    1ha3    v3hg32    1ha2    v2hg22                    supplied at 20C. For operation at steady state, determine the
ma1    v1    v3    1ha1    v1hg12    1ha3    v3hg32                    mass flow rate, in kg/s, of
 #
ma2                                                                    (a) the entering atmospheric air.
                                                                       (b) the makeup water.
Employ this relation to demonstrate on a psychrometric chart
that state 3 of the mixture lies on a straight line connecting the     Ignore kinetic and potential energy effects.
initial states of the two streams before mixing.
                                                                    12.60 Liquid water at 50C enters a forced draft cooling tower
12.55 For the adiabatic mixing process in Example 12.14, plot          operating at steady state. Cooled water exits the tower with a
   the exit temperature, in C, versus the volumetric flow rate of      mass flow rate of 80 kg/min. No makeup water is provided. A
   stream 2 ranging from 0 to 1400 m3/min. Discuss the plot as         fan located within the tower draws in atmospheric air at 17C,
   (AV)2 goes to zero and as (AV)2 becomes large.                      0.098 MPa, 60% relative humidity with a volumetric flow rate
                                                                       of 110 m3/min. Saturated air exits the tower at 30C, 0.098
12.56 A stream consisting of 35 m3/min of moist air at 14C,            MPa. The power input to the fan is 8 kW. Ignoring kinetic and
   1 atm, 80% relative humidity mixes adiabatically with a             potential energy effects, determine
   stream consisting of 80 m3/min of moist air at 40C, 1 atm,
   40% relative humidity, giving a single mixed stream at 1 atm.       (a) the mass flow rate of the liquid stream entering, in kg/min.
   Using the psychrometric chart together with the procedure of        (b) the temperature of the cooled liquid stream exiting, in C.
   Prob. 12.58, determine the relative humidity and temperature,
   in C, of the exiting stream.

Design & Open Ended Problems: Exploring Engineering Practice

12.1D For comfort in indoor natatoriums, air and water tem-         the pool surface. At 30C, an olympic-size pool can evaporate
   peratures should be between 24 and 30C, and the relative hu-     up to 90 kg/h. The airborne water vapor has energy that can
   midity in the range 50 to 60%. A major contributor to dis-       be extracted during dehumidification and used to heat the pool
   comfort and inefficient energy use is water evaporating from     water. Devise a practical means for accomplishing this energy-
618 Chapter 12 Ideal Gas Mixture and Psychrometric Applications

   saving measure. Also propose means for preventing conden-         12.4D Biosphere 2, located near Tucson, Arizona, is the world's
   sation on the natatorium windows for outdoor temperatures as         largest enclosed ecosystem project. Drawing on what has been
   low as 23C. For each case, provide an equipment schematic            learned from the project, develop a plan for the air-condition-
   and appropriate supporting calculations.                             ing systems required to maintain a healthy environment for a
                                                                        12-person biosphere on Mars. Estimate the total power required
12.2D Figure P12.2D shows a spray cooler included on the                by the systems of your plan.
   schematic of a plant layout. Arguing that it can only be the
   addition of makeup water at location 3 that is intended, an en-   12.5D Figure P12.5D shows a system for supplying a space
   gineer orders the direction of the arrow at this location on the     with 2100 m3/min of conditioned air at a dry-bulb tempera-
   schematic to be reversed. Evaluate the engineer's order and          ture of 22C and a relative humidity of 60% when the outside
   write a memorandum explaining your evaluation.                       air is at a dry-bulb temperature of 35C and a relative humid-
                                                                        ity of 55%. Dampers A and B can be set to give three alter-
         2             Spray     Water                                  native operating modes: (1) Both dampers closed (no use of
                       head      circulation                            recirculated air). (2) Damper A open and damper B closed.
Exit moist air,                  piping                                 One-third of the conditioned air comes from outside air.
    T2 < T1                                                             (3) Both dampers open. One-third of the conditioned air comes
                                  Water                                 from outside air. One-third of the recirculated air bypasses the
                                  chiller                               dehumidifier via open damper B, and the rest flows through
                                                                        the damper A. Which of the three operating modes should be
1                                                                       used? Discuss.

Inlet moist air,                                                                                          Recirculated air 27°C,  = 49%

T1                                         3

            Figure P12.2D                                            Damper Cooling coil           Damper
                                                                        A                             B Heating coil
12.3D Control of microbial contaminants is crucial in hospital
   operating rooms. Figure P12.3D illustrates the proposed design    Outside air                                              Moist air:
   of a hospital air-handling system aimed at effective infection    at 35°C,                                                 2100 m3/min at
   control. Write a critique of this design, taking into considera-   = 55%                                                   22°C,  = 60%
   tion issues including, but not necessarily limited to the
   following: Why is 100% outside air specified rather than a                          Condensate                              Air-conditioned
   recirculated air-filtration arrangement requiring minimum out-                                                                     space
   side air? Why is steam humidification used rather than the more
   common water-spray method? Why are three filters with
   increasing efficiency specified, and why are they located as
   shown? What additional features might be incorporated to pro-
   mote air quality?

         Intermediate  To other zones                                 Figure P12.5D
              filter
                                          Humidifier-                12.6D Savings can be realized on domestic water heating bills
Supply                                        steam                     by using a heat pump that exhausts to the hot water storage
  fan                                        injector                   tank of a conventional water heater. When the heat pump evap-
                                                                        orator is located within the dwelling living space, cooling and
        Cooling        Terminal                                         dehumidification of the room air also result. For a hot water
           coil         reheat                                          (60C) requirement of 0.25 m3 per day, compare the annual
                          unit                                          cost of electricity for a heat-pump water heater with the an-
         Preheat                                                        nual cost for a conventional electrical water heater. Provide a
           coil                                                         schematic showing how the heat-pump water heater might be
          Prefilter                                                     configured. Where might the heat pump evaporator be located
                                                                        during periods of the year when cooling and dehumidifying
                                 Terminal                               are not required?
                                   filter
                                                                     12.7D A laboratory test facility requires 1.4 m3/s of condi-
    100%                         Operating                              tioned air at 38C and relative humidities ranging from 20
   outside                         room

      air

 Figure P12.3D
                                                       Design & Open Ended Problems: Exploring Engineering Practice 619

to 50%. As shown in Fig. P12.7D, the supply system takes                              6  Return    8      Process
in ambient air at temperatures ranging from 21 to 32C and                                water            steam
relative humidities ranging from 50 to 100%. As some de-
humidification is needed to achieve the temperature and hu-                        5                       Heat-recovery
midity control required by the test facility, two strategies are      Compressor                          steam generator
under consideration: (1) Use a conventional refrigeration sys-
tem to cool the incoming air below its dew point tempera-                                                                      4
ture. (2) Use a rotary desiccant dehumidification unit.
Develop schematics and design specifications, based on each                           7 Injection
of these strategies, that would allow the supply system to pro-                            steam
vide the required temperature and humidity control for this
application.                                                                                                                      Net
                                                                                                                                  Power

                                                                                               Combustor           Turbine
                                                                                      2                   3

Ambient                                      Laboratory Exhaust

air             Supply                         test                   1
                                             facility
                          system  1.4 m3/s,                           Air                Fuel
21  Tamb  32C
50  amb  100%                     38C,

                                  20   50%                             Figure P12.9D

 Figure P12.7D

12.8D As a consulting engineer, you have been retained to             12.10D Most supermarkets use air-conditioning systems de-
   recommend means for providing condenser cooling for a                 signed primarily to control temperature, and these typically
   proposed 25% expansion of an electrical-generating plant in           produce a relative humidity of about 55%. At this relative hu-
   your locale. Consider the use of wet cooling towers, dry cool-        midity a substantial amount of energy must be used to keep
   ing towers, and cooling lakes. Also, consider relevant envi-          frost and condensation from forming inside refrigerated dis-
   ronmental issues, the effect on power plant thermodynamic             play cases. Investigate technologies available for reducing the
   performance, and costs. Write a report detailing your recom-          overall humidity levels to 40­45% and thereby reducing prob-
   mendations.                                                           lems associated with frost and condensation. Estimate the po-
                                                                         tential cost savings associated with such a strategy for a
12.9D Figure P12.9D shows a steam-injected gas-turbine                   supermarket in your locale.
   cogeneration system that produces power and process steam:
   a simplified Cheng cycle. The steam is generated by a heat-        12.11D Is Stale Airplane Air Making Us Sick? (see box
   recovery steam generator (HRSG) in which the hot gas exit-            Sec. 12.4). Investigate typical equipment schematics providing
   ing the turbine at state 4 is cooled and discharged at state 5. A     a blend of fresh and recirculated filtered air to the passenger
   separate stream of return water enters the HRSG at state 6 and        cabin of a commercial airplane. Write a report including at
   steam exits at states 7 and 8. The superheated steam exiting at       least three references.
   7 is injected into the combustor. In what ways does the steam-
   injected system shown in the figure differ from the humid air      12.12D How Cold Is Cold? (see box Sec. 12.6). Investigate
   turbine (HAT) cycle? Draw the schematic of a HAT cycle.               the development of the heat index used to alert us to possible
   Discuss appropriate applications of each cycle.                       hot weather health dangers. Write a report including at least
                                                                         three references.
                          C         Reacting
                          H  Mixtures and
                          A
                          P   Combustion
                          T

13 E
                          R

chapter objective    E N G I N E E R I N G C O N T E X T The objective of this chapter is to
                     study systems involving chemical reactions. Since the combustion of hydrocarbon fuels
                     occurs in most power-producing devices (Chaps. 8 and 9), combustion is emphasized.

                        The thermodynamic analysis of reacting systems is primarily an extension of principles
                     introduced thus far. The concepts applied in the first part of the chapter dealing with com-
                     bustion fundamentals remain the same: conservation of mass, conservation of energy, and
                     the second law. It is necessary, though, to modify the methods used to evaluate specific
                     enthalpy, internal energy, and entropy, by accounting for changing chemical composition.
                     Only the manner in which these properties are evaluated represents a departure from
                     previous practice, for once appropriate values are determined they are used as in earlier
                     chapters in the energy and entropy balances for the system under consideration. In the
                     second part of the chapter, the exergy concept of Chap. 7 is extended by introducing
                     chemical exergy.

                        The principles developed in this chapter allow the equilibrium composition of a mixture
                     of chemical substances to be determined. This topic is studied in the next chapter. The
                     subject of dissociation is also deferred until then. Prediction of reaction rates is not within
                     the scope of classical thermodynamics, so the topic of chemical kinetics, which deals with
                     reaction rates, is not discussed in this text.

                     COMBUSTION FUNDAMENTALS

reactants            13.1 Introducing Combustion
products
                     When a chemical reaction occurs, the bonds within molecules of the reactants are broken,
complete combustion  and atoms and electrons rearrange to form products. In combustion reactions, rapid
620                  oxidation of combustible elements of the fuel results in energy release as combustion prod-
                     ucts are formed. The three major combustible chemical elements in most common fuels
                     are carbon, hydrogen, and sulfur. Sulfur is usually a relatively unimportant contributor to
                     the energy released, but it can be a significant cause of pollution and corrosion problems.
                     Combustion is complete when all the carbon present in the fuel is burned to carbon dioxide,
                     all the hydrogen is burned to water, all the sulfur is burned to sulfur dioxide, and all other
                                                                                                                       13.1 Introducing Combustion 621

combustible elements are fully oxidized. When these conditions are not fulfilled, combus-
tion is incomplete.

   In this chapter, we deal with combustion reactions expressed by chemical equations of
the form

                                           reactants S products
or

                                       fuel  oxidizer S products

When dealing with chemical reactions, it is necessary to remember that mass is conserved,
so the mass of the products equals the mass of the reactants. The total mass of each chemi-
cal element must be the same on both sides of the equation, even though the elements exist
in different chemical compounds in the reactants and products. However, the number of moles
of products may differ from the number of moles of reactants.

     for example. . . consider the complete combustion of hydrogen with oxygen

                                        1H2       1  O2   S   1H2O                                     (13.1)
                                                  2

In this case, the reactants are hydrogen and oxygen. Hydrogen is the fuel and oxygen is                         stoichiometric coefficients
the oxidizer. Water is the only product of the reaction. The numerical coefficients in the
equation, which precede the chemical symbols to give equal amounts of each chemical
element on both sides of the equation, are called stoichiometric coefficients. In words,
Eq. 13.1 states

                               1  kmol  H2     1  kmol    O2  S  1  kmol  H2O
                                               2

Note that the total numbers of moles on the left and right sides of Eq. 13.1 are not equal.

However, because mass is conserved, the total mass of reactants must equal the total mass

of  products.  Since  1  kmol  of  H2  equals  2  kg,  1  kmol  of  O2  equals  16  kg,  and  1  kmol  of  H2O
                                                       2

equals 18 kg, Eq. 13.1 can be interpreted as stating

                                   2 kg H2  16 kg O2 S 18 kg H2O

   In the remainder of this section, consideration is given to the makeup of the fuel, oxidizer,
and combustion products typically involved in engineering combustion applications.

FUELS

A fuel is simply a combustible substance. In this chapter emphasis is on hydrocarbon fuels,                     ultimate analysis
which contain hydrogen and carbon. Sulfur and other chemical substances also may be pres-
ent. Hydrocarbon fuels can exist as liquids, gases, and solids.

   Liquid hydrocarbon fuels are commonly derived from crude oil through distillation and
cracking processes. Examples are gasoline, diesel fuel, kerosene, and other types of fuel oils.
Most liquid fuels are mixtures of hydrocarbons for which compositions are usually given in
terms of mass fractions. For simplicity in combustion calculations, gasoline is often mod-
eled as octane, C8H18, and diesel fuel as dodecane, C12H26.

   Gaseous hydrocarbon fuels are obtained from natural gas wells or are produced in certain
chemical processes. Natural gas normally consists of several different hydrocarbons, with the
major constituent being methane, CH4. The compositions of gaseous fuels are usually given
in terms of mole fractions. Both gaseous and liquid hydrocarbon fuels can be synthesized
from coal, oil shale, and tar sands.

   Coal is a familiar solid fuel. Its composition varies considerably with the location from
which it is mined. For combustion calculations, the composition of coal is usually expressed
as an ultimate analysis. The ultimate analysis gives the composition on a mass basis in terms
622 Chapter 13 Reacting Mixtures and Combustion

                                of the relative amounts of chemical elements (carbon, sulfur, hydrogen, nitrogen, oxygen)
                                and ash.

METHODOLOGY                MODELING COMBUSTION AIR
UPDATE
                           Oxygen is required in every combustion reaction. Pure oxygen is used only in special
In this model, air is as-  applications such as cutting and welding. In most combustion applications, air provides
sumed to contain no water  the needed oxygen. The composition of a typical sample of dry air is given in Table 12.1.
vapor. When moist air is   For the combustion calculations of this book, however, the following model is used for
involved in combustion,    simplicity:
the water vapor present
must be considered in       All components of air other than oxygen are lumped together with nitrogen. Accord-
writing the combustion        ingly, air is considered to be 21% oxygen and 79% nitrogen on a molar basis. With this
equation.                     idealization the molar ratio of the nitrogen to the oxygen is 0.790.21  3.76. When
                              air supplies the oxygen in a combustion reaction, therefore, every mole of oxygen is
                              accompanied by 3.76 moles of nitrogen.

                            We also assume that the nitrogen present in the combustion air does not undergo chemi-
                              cal reaction. That is, nitrogen is regarded as inert. The nitrogen in the products is at the
                              same temperature as the other products, however, so the nitrogen undergoes a change of
                              state if the products are at a temperature other than the air temperature before combus-
                              tion. If high enough temperatures are attained, nitrogen can form compounds such as
                              nitric oxide and nitrogen dioxide. Even trace amounts of oxides of nitrogen appearing
                              in the exhaust of internal combustion engines can be a source of air pollution.

air­fuel ratio             AIR­FUEL RATIO. Two parameters that are frequently used to quantify the amounts of fuel
                           and air in a particular combustion process are the air­fuel ratio and its reciprocal, the fuel­air
                           ratio. The air­fuel ratio is simply the ratio of the amount of air in a reaction to the amount
                           of fuel. The ratio can be written on a molar basis (moles of air divided by moles of fuel) or
                           on a mass basis (mass of air divided by mass of fuel). Conversion between these values is
                           accomplished using the molecular weights of the air, Mair, and fuel, Mfuel,

                                                             mass of air  moles of air  Mair
                                                            mass of fuel moles of fuel  Mfuel

                                                                             moles of air a Mair b
                                                                                moles of fuel Mfuel

                           or

                               AF  AF a Mair b      (13.2)
                                             Mfuel

                           where AF is the air­fuel ratio on a molar basis and AF is the ratio on a mass basis. For
                           the combustion calculations of this book the molecular weight of air is taken as 28.97.
                           Table A-1 provide the molecular weights of several important hydrocarbons.

theoretical air            THEORETICAL AIR. The minimum amount of air that supplies sufficient oxygen for the
                           complete combustion of all the carbon, hydrogen, and sulfur present in the fuel is called
                           the theoretical amount of air. For complete combustion with the theoretical amount of air,
                           the products would consist of carbon dioxide, water, sulfur dioxide, the nitrogen accompa-
                           nying the oxygen in the air, and any nitrogen contained in the fuel. No free oxygen would
                           appear in the products.
                                                            13.1 Introducing Combustion 623

    for example. . . let us determine the theoretical amount of air for the complete
combustion of methane. For this reaction, the products contain only carbon dioxide, water,
and nitrogen. The reaction is

CH4  a1O2  3.76N22 S bCO2  cH2O  d N2                       (13.3)

where a, b, c, and d represent the numbers of moles of oxygen, carbon dioxide, water, and
nitrogen. In writing the left side of Eq. 13.3, 3.76 moles of nitrogen are considered to ac-
company each mole of oxygen. Applying the conservation of mass principle to the carbon,
hydrogen, oxygen, and nitrogen, respectively, results in four equations among the four
unknowns

C:     b1

H:     2c  4

O: 2b  c  2a

N:     d  3.76a

Solving these equations, the balanced chemical equation is

CH4  21O2  3.76N22 S CO2  2H2O  7.52N2                      (13.4)

   The coefficient 2 before the term (O2  3.76N2) in Eq. 13.4 is the number of moles of
oxygen in the combustion air, per mole of fuel, and not the amount of air. The amount
of combustion air is 2 moles of oxygen plus 2  3.76 moles of nitrogen, giving a total of
9.52 moles of air per mole of fuel. Thus, for the reaction given by Eq. 13.4 the air­fuel
ratio on a molar basis is 9.52. To calculate the air­fuel ratio on a mass basis, use Eq. 13.2
to write

AF  AF a Mair b  9.52 a 28.97 b  17.19 
Mfuel  16.04

   Normally the amount of air supplied is either greater or less than the theoretical amount.      percent of theoretical air
The amount of air actually supplied is commonly expressed in terms of the percent of               percent excess air
theoretical air. For example, 150% of theoretical air means that the air actually supplied
is 1.5 times the theoretical amount of air. The amount of air supplied can be expressed al-
ternatively as a percent excess or a percent deficiency of air. Thus, 150% of theoretical air
is equivalent to 50% excess air, and 80% of theoretical air is the same as a 20% deficiency
of air.

    for example. . . consider the complete combustion of methane with 150% theo-
retical air (50% excess air). The balanced chemical reaction equation is

CH4  11.52 122 1O2  3.76N22 S CO2  2H2O  O2  11.28N2        (13.5)

In this equation, the amount of air per mole of fuel is 1.5 times the theoretical amount
determined by Eq. 13.4. Accordingly, the air­fuel ratio is 1.5 times the air­fuel ratio
determined for Eq. 13.4. Since complete combustion is assumed, the products contain only
carbon dioxide, water, nitrogen, and oxygen. The excess air supplied appears in the products
as uncombined oxygen and a greater amount of nitrogen than in Eq. 13.4, based on the
theoretical amount of air. 

   The equivalence ratio is the ratio of the actual fuel­air ratio to the fuel­air ratio for com-  equivalence ratio
plete combustion with the theoretical amount of air. The reactants are said to form a lean
mixture when the equivalence ratio is less than unity. When the ratio is greater than unity,
the reactants are said to form a rich mixture.
624 Chapter 13 Reacting Mixtures and Combustion

                                    In Example 13.1, we use conservation of mass to obtain balanced chemical reactions. The
                                air­fuel ratio for each of the reactions is also calculated.

  E X A M P L E 1 3 . 1 Determining the Air­Fuel Ratio

  Determine the air­fuel ratio on both a molar and mass basis for the complete combustion of octane, C8H18, with (a) the the-
  oretical amount of air, (b) 150% theoretical air (50% excess air).

  SOLUTION

  Known: Octane, C8H18, is burned completely with (a) the theoretical amount of air, (b) 150% theoretical air.
  Find: Determine the air­fuel ratio on a molar and a mass basis.

  Assumptions:

  1. Each mole of oxygen in the combustion air is accompanied by 3.76 moles of nitrogen.
  2. The nitrogen is inert.
  3. Combustion is complete.

  Analysis:

  (a) For complete combustion of C8H18 with the theoretical amount of air, the products contain carbon dioxide, water, and
  nitrogen only. That is

                                               C8H18  a1O2  3.76N22 S bCO2  cH2O  dN2

  Applying the conservation of mass principle to the carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, and nitrogen, respectively, gives

                                                      C:    b8

                                                      H:    2c  18

                                                      O: 2b  c  2a

                                                      N:    d  3.76a

  Solving these equations, a  12.5, b  8, c  9, d  47. The balanced chemical equation is

                                 C8H18  12.51O2  3.76N22 S 8CO2  9H2O  47N2

  The air­fuel ratio on a molar basis is

                                 AF       12.5  12.513.762 12.514.762         kmol 1air2
                                                                        59.5 kmol 1fuel2
                                                   1        1

  The air­fuel ratio expressed on a mass basis is

                                                            kg 1air2
                                                          28.97 kmol 1air2
                                          kmol 1air2                                kg 1air2
                AF  c 59.5 kmol 1fuel2 d                    kg 1fuel2 Ą  15.1 kg 1fuel2
                                                          114.22 kmol 1fuel2

  (b) For 150% theoretical air, the chemical equation for complete combustion takes the form

                C8H18  1.5112.52 1O2  3.76N22 S bCO2  cH2O  d N2  eO2

  Applying conservation of mass

                                          C:                b8

                                          H:              2c  18

                                          O: 2b  c  2e  11.52 112.52 122

                                          N:                d  11.52 112.52 13.762
                                                                                    13.1 Introducing Combustion 625

Solving this set of equations, b  8, c  9, d  70.5, e  6.25, giving a balanced chemical equation

C8H18  18.751O2  3.76N22 S 8CO2  9H2O  70.5N2  6.25O2

The air­fuel ratio on a molar basis is

                                        AF   18.7514.762  kmol 1air2
                                                           89.25 kmol 1fuel2
                                             1

On a mass basis, the air­fuel ratio is 22.6 kg (air)kg (fuel), as can be verified.

 When complete combustion occurs with excess air, oxygen appears in the products, in addition to carbon dioxide, water,

    and nitrogen.

DETERMINING PRODUCTS OF COMBUSTION

In each of the illustrations given above, complete combustion is assumed. For a hydro-          dry product analysis
carbon fuel, this means that the only allowed products are CO2, H2O, and N2, with O2
also present when excess air is supplied. If the fuel is specified and combustion is complete,
the respective amounts of the products can be determined by applying the conservation
of mass principle to the chemical equation. The procedure for obtaining the balanced re-
action equation of an actual reaction where combustion is incomplete is not always so
straightforward.

   Combustion is the result of a series of very complicated and rapid chemical reactions, and
the products formed depend on many factors. When fuel is burned in the cylinder of an in-
ternal combustion engine, the products of the reaction vary with the temperature and pres-
sure in the cylinder. In combustion equipment of all kinds, the degree of mixing of the fuel
and air is a controlling factor in the reactions that occur once the fuel and air mixture is
ignited. Although the amount of air supplied in an actual combustion process may exceed
the theoretical amount, it is not uncommon for some carbon monoxide and unburned oxygen
to appear in the products. This can be due to incomplete mixing, insufficient time for com-
plete combustion, and other factors. When the amount of air supplied is less than the theo-
retical amount of air, the products may include both CO2 and CO, and there also may be
unburned fuel in the products. Unlike the complete combustion cases considered above, the
products of combustion of an actual combustion process and their relative amounts can be
determined only by measurement.

   Among several devices for measuring the composition of products of combustion are the
Orsat analyzer, gas chromatograph, infrared analyzer, and flame ionization detector. Data
from these devices can be used to determine the mole fractions of the gaseous products of
combustion. The analyses are often reported on a "dry" basis. In a dry product analysis, the
mole fractions are given for all gaseous products except the water vapor. In Examples 13.2
and 13.3, we show how analyses of the products of combustion on a dry basis can be used
to determine the balanced chemical reaction equations.

   Since water is formed when hydrocarbon fuels are burned, the mole fraction of water va-
por in the gaseous products of combustion can be significant. If the gaseous products of com-
bustion are cooled at constant mixture pressure, the dew point temperature is reached when
water vapor begins to condense. Since water deposited on duct work, mufflers, and other
metal parts can cause corrosion, knowledge of the dew point temperature is important. De-
termination of the dew point temperature is illustrated in Example 13.2, which also features
a dry product analysis.
626 Chapter 13 Reacting Mixtures and Combustion

Thermodynamics in the News...

Airborne Soot Adds to Weather Woes,                               patterns indicate that
Some Say                                                          this leads to heavy
                                                                  rainfall and flooding
According to a new study, the weather in northern Africa, India,  in some areas, while
China, and the southern United States is being affected by soot   dry conditions and
from cooking fires and diesel engines. Like global warming        dust storms occur in
associated with carbon dioxide, researchers believe that soot     other areas.
may contribute significantly to climate change.
                                                                      Soot is turning out to be more significant than previously
    Widespread use of fuels such as coal, cow dung, crop          thought, experts say. Based on the computer models, soot
residue, and wood in developing countries produces vast           seems to have as much of an effect on climate as carbon
amounts of unburned black carbon, or soot. Diesel engine          dioxide, although the atmospheric mechanisms are different.
exhaust also contains soot. The sooty carbon particles are        Industrialized nations produce the most carbon dioxide,
thought to increase the absorption of sunlight in the upper       whereas developing nations tend to emit more soot into the
atmosphere, causing hotter upper air and less sunlight to         atmosphere. These new findings suggest that curbing both
reach the ground. With uneven warming, the air becomes un-        sources of atmospheric emission might be needed to address
stable and more clouds form. Computer models of weather           climate change concerns.

E X A M P L E 1 3 . 2 Using a Dry Product Analysis

Methane, CH4, is burned with dry air. The molar analysis of the products on a dry basis is CO2, 9.7%; CO, 0.5%; O2, 2.95%;
and N2, 86.85%. Determine (a) the air­fuel ratio on both a molar and a mass basis, (b) the percent theoretical air, (c) the dew
point temperature of the products, in C, if the mixture were cooled at 1 atm.

SOLUTION

Known: Methane is burned with dry air. The molar analysis of the products on a dry basis is provided.

Find: Determine (a) the air­fuel ratio on both a molar and a mass basis, (b) the percent theoretical air, and (c) the dew point
temperature of the products, in C, if cooled at 1 atm.

Assumptions:

1. Each mole of oxygen in the combustion air is accompanied by 3.76 moles of nitrogen, which is inert.
2. The products form an ideal gas mixture.

     Analysis:

 (a) The solution is conveniently conducted on the basis of 100 kmol of dry products. The chemical equation then reads

              aCH4  b1O2  3.76N22 S 9.7CO2  0.5CO  2.95O2  86.85N2  cH2O

In addition to the assumed 100 lbmol of dry products, water must be included as a product.
    Applying conservation of mass to carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen, respectively

              C:                                                  9.7  0.5  a

              H:                                                  2c  4a

              O: 19.72 122  0.5  212.952  c  2b

 Solving this set of equations gives a  10.2, b  23.1, c  20.4. The balanced chemical equation is

              10.2CH4  23.11O2  3.76N22 S 9.7CO2  0.5CO  2.95O2  86.85N2  20.4H2O
                                                                                           13.1 Introducing Combustion 627

On a molar basis, the air­fuel ratio is

                                                    23.114.762           kmol 1air2
                                         AF  10.2  10.78 kmol 1fuel2

On a mass basis

                                         AF         110.782  a 28.97b    19.47  kg 1air2
                                                              16.04             kg 1fuel2

(b) The balanced chemical equation for the complete combustion of methane with the theoretical amount of air is

                 CH4  21O2  3.76N22 S CO2  2H2O  7.52N2

The theoretical air­fuel ratio on a molar basis is

                                                          214.762        kmol 1air2
                                         1AF2theo  1  9.52 kmol 1fuel2

The percent theoretical air is then found from

                                                                    1AF2
                                         % theoretical air 

                                                                  1AF2theo

                                                   10.78 kmol 1air2kmol 1fuel2
                                                  9.52 kmol 1air2kmol 1fuel2  1.13 1113%2

 (c) To determine the dew point temperature requires the partial pressure of the water vapor pv. The partial pressure pv is found

     from pv  yvp, where yv is the mole fraction of the water vapor in the combustion products and p is 1 atm.
         Referring to the balanced chemical equation of part (a), the mole fraction of the water vapor is

                                                    yv        20.4       0.169
                                                          100  20.4

Thus, pv  0.169 atm  0.1712 bar. Interpolating in Table A-2, T  57C.

 The solution could be obtained on the basis of any assumed amount of dry products--for example, 1 lbmol. With some

    other assumed amount, the values of the coefficients of the balanced chemical equation would differ from those obtained
    in the solution, but the air­fuel ratio, the value for the percent of theoretical air, and the dew point temperature would be
    unchanged.

 The three unknown coefficients, a, b, and c, are evaluated here by application of conservation of mass to carbon, hydro-

    gen, and oxygen. As a check, note that the nitrogen also balances

                                                              N: b13.762  86.85

    This confirms the accuracy of both the given product analysis and the calculations conducted to determine the unknown
    coefficients.

 If the products of combustion were cooled at constant pressure below the dew point temperature of 134F, some conden-

    sation of the water vapor would occur.

   In Example 13.3, a fuel mixture having a known molar analysis is burned with air, giv-
ing products with a known dry analysis.
628 Chapter 13 Reacting Mixtures and Combustion

E X A M P L E 1 3 . 3 Burning Natural Gas with Excess Air

A natural gas has the following molar analysis: CH4, 80.62%; C2H6, 5.41%; C3H8, 1.87%; C4H10, 1.60%; N2, 10.50%. The gas is
burned with dry air, giving products having a molar analysis on a dry basis: CO2, 7.8%; CO, 0.2%; O2, 7%; N2, 85%. (a) Deter-
mine the air­fuel ratio on a molar basis. (b) Assuming ideal gas behavior for the fuel mixture, determine the amount of products
in kmol that would be formed from 100 m3 of fuel mixture at 300 K and 1 bar. (c) Determine the percent of theoretical air.

SOLUTION

Known: A natural gas with a specified molar analysis burns with dry air giving products having a known molar analysis on
a dry basis.

Find: Determine the air­fuel ratio on a molar basis, the amount of products in kmol that would be formed from 100 m3 of
natural gas at 300 K and 1 bar, and the percent of theoretical air.

Assumptions:

1. Each mole of oxygen in the combustion air is accompanied by 3.76 moles of nitrogen, which is inert.
2. The fuel mixture can be modeled as an ideal gas.

Analysis:

(a) The solution can be conducted on the basis of an assumed amount of fuel mixture or on the basis of an assumed amount
of dry products. Let us illustrate the first procedure, basing the solution on 1 kmol of fuel mixture. The chemical equation
then takes the form

              10.8062CH4  0.0541C2H6  0.0187C3H8  0.0160C4H10  0.1050N22
                 a1O2  3.76N22 S b10.078CO2  0.002CO  0.07O2  0.85N22  cH2O

The products consist of b kmol of dry products and c kmol of water vapor, each per kmol of fuel mixture.
    Applying conservation of mass to carbon

              b10.078  0.0022  0.8062  210.05412  310.01872  410.01602

Solving gives b  12.931. Conservation of mass for hydrogen results in

              2c  410.80622  610.05412  810.01872  1010.01602

which gives c  1.93. The unknown coefficient a can be found from either an oxygen balance or a nitrogen balance. Apply-
ing conservation of mass to oxygen

              12.931 3210.0782  0.002  210.072 4  1.93  2a

 giving a  2.892.

         The balanced chemical equation is then

              10.8062CH4  0.0541C2H6  0.0187C3H8  0.0160C4H10  0.1050N22
                 2.8921O2  3.76N22 S 12.93110.078CO2  0.002CO  0.07O2  0.85N22
                 1.93H2O

The air­fuel ratio on a molar basis is

                                        AF       12.8922 14.762  kmol 1air2
                                                                  13.77 kmol 1fuel2
                                                 1

(b) By inspection of the chemical reaction equation, the total amount of products is b  c  12.931  1.93  14.861 kmol
of products per kmol of fuel. The amount of fuel in kmol, nF, present in 100 m3 of fuel mixture at 300 K and 1 bar can be
determined from the ideal gas equation of state as

                     pV
              nF  RT

                           1105 N/m22 1100 m32
                  18314 N # m/ kmol # K2 1300 K2  4.01 kmol 1fuel2
                                              13.2 Conservation of Energy--Reacting Systems 629

Accordingly, the amount of product mixture that would be formed from 100 m3 of fuel mixture is (14.861)(4.01)  59.59
kmol of product gas.

(c) The balanced chemical equation for the complete combustion of the fuel mixture with the theoretical amount of air is

                                10.8062CH4  0.0541C2H6  0.0187C3H8  0.0160C4H10  0.1050N22
                                    21O2  3.76N22 S 1.0345CO2  1.93H2O  7.625N2

The theoretical air­fuel ratio on a molar basis is

                                     214.762  kmol 1air2
                                     1AF2theo  1  9.52 kmol 1fuel2

The percent theoretical air is then

                  13.77 kmol 1air2kmol 1fuel2
% theoretical air  9.52 kmol 1air2kmol 1fuel2  1.45 1145%2

 A check on both the accuracy of the given molar analyses and the calculations conducted to determine the unknown co-

    efficients is obtained by applying conservation of mass to nitrogen. The amount of nitrogen in the reactants is

                                   0.105  13.76212.8922  10.98 kmolkmol of fuel

    The amount of nitrogen in the products is (0.85)(12.931)  10.99 kmolkmol of fuel. The difference can be attributed to
    round-off.

13.2 Conservation of Energy--
           Reacting Systems

The objective of the present section is to illustrate the application of the conservation of en-
ergy principle to reacting systems. The forms of the conservation of energy principle intro-
duced previously remain valid whether or not a chemical reaction occurs within the system.
However, the methods used for evaluating the properties of reacting systems differ somewhat
from the practices used to this point.

 13.2.1 Evaluating Enthalpy for Reacting Systems

In each of the tables of thermodynamic properties used thus far, values for the specific in-      standard reference state
ternal energy, enthalpy, and entropy are given relative to some arbitrary datum state where
the enthalpy (or alternatively the internal energy) and entropy are set to zero. This approach
is satisfactory for evaluations involving differences in property values between states of the
same composition, for then arbitrary datums cancel. However, when a chemical reaction oc-
curs, reactants disappear and products are formed, so differences cannot be calculated for all
substances involved. For reacting systems, it is necessary to evaluate h, u, and s in such a
way that there are no subsequent ambiguities or inconsistencies in evaluating properties. In
this section, we will consider how this is accomplished for h and u. The case of entropy is
handled differently and is taken up in Sec. 13.5.

   An enthalpy datum for the study of reacting systems can be established by assigning
arbitrarily a value of zero to the enthalpy of the stable elements at a state called the
standard reference state and defined by Tref  298.15 K (25C) and pref  1 atm. Note
that only stable elements are assigned a value of zero enthalpy at the standard state. The
term stable simply means that the particular element is in a chemically stable form. For
630 Chapter 13 Reacting Mixtures and Combustion

                                example, at the standard state the stable forms of hydrogen, oxygen, and nitrogen are H2,
                                O2, and N2 and not the monatomic H, O, and N. No ambiguities or conflicts result with
                                this choice of datum.

enthalpy of formation   ENTHALPY OF FORMATION. Using the datum introduced above, enthalpy values can be
                        assigned to compounds for use in the study of reacting systems. The enthalpy of a compound
   C          CO2       at the standard state equals its enthalpy of formation, symbolized h°f. The enthalpy of
Tref, pref  Tref, pref  formation is the energy released or absorbed when the compound is formed from its elements,
                        the compound and elements all being at Tref and pref. The enthalpy of formation is usually
   O2                   determined by application of procedures from statistical thermodynamics using observed
Tref, pref              spectroscopic data.

                           The enthalpy of formation also can be found in principle by measuring the heat transfer
                        in a reaction in which the compound is formed from the elements.  for example . . .
                        consider the simple reactor shown in Fig. 13.1, in which carbon and oxygen each enter at
                        Tref and pref and react completely at steady state to form carbon dioxide at the same temperature
                        and pressure. Carbon dioxide is formed from carbon and oxygen according to

 Figure 13.1 Reactor                                     C  O2 S CO2                                 (13.6)
used to discuss the
enthalpy of formation   This reaction would be exothermic, so for the carbon dioxide to exit at the same tempera-
concept.                ture as the entering elements, there would be a heat transfer from the reactor to its sur-
                        roundings. The rate of heat transfer and the enthalpies of the incoming and exiting streams
                        are related by the energy rate balance

                                           0       #      #          #            #
                                                  Qcv    mChC       mO2hO2       m h CO2 CO2

                                 #
                        where m and h denote, respectively, m# ass flow rate and specific enthalpy. In writing this
                        equation, we have assumed no work Wcv and negligible effects of kinetic and potential en-

                        ergy. For enthalpies on a molar basis, the energy rate balance appears as

                                           0       #       #        #            #
                                                  Qcv      nChC     n h O2 O2    nCO2h CO2

                                #
                        where n and h denote, respectively, the molar flow rate and enthalpy per mole. Solving for

                        the specific enthalpy of carbon dioxide and noting from Eq. 13.6 that all molar flow rates

                        are equal

                                   hCO2     #        #     hC      #     hO2      #       hC    hO2  (13.7)
                                                     nC           n O2
                                           Qcv      #             #              Qcv
                                           #        n CO2         n CO2          #
                                           n CO2                                 n CO2

                        Since carbon and oxygen are stable elements at the standard state, hC  hO2  0, and Eq. 13.7
                        becomes

                                                                    #

                                                           h CO2    Qcv                              (13.8)
                                                                    #
                                                                    n CO2

                        Accordingly, the value assigned to the specific enthalpy of carbon dioxide at the standard

                        state, the enthalpy of formation, equals the heat transfer, per mole of CO2, between the re-
                        actor and its surroundings. If the heat transfer could be measured accurately, it would be
                        found to equal 393,520 kJ per kmol of carbon dioxide formed. 

                           Table A-25 give values of the enthalpy of formation for several compounds in units of
                        kJ/kmol. In this text, the superscript  is used to denote properties at 1 atm. For the case

                        of the enthalpy of formation, the reference temperature Tref is also intended by this symbol.
                        The values of h°f listed in Table A-25 for CO2 correspond to those given in the previous
                        example.
                                                                                             13.2 Conservation of Energy--Reacting Systems 631

   The sign associated with the enthalpy of formation values appearing in Tables A-25 cor-
responds to the sign convention for heat transfer. If there is heat transfer from a reactor in
which a compound is formed from its elements (an exothermic reaction as in the previous
example), the enthalpy of formation has a negative sign. If a heat transfer to the reactor is
required (an endothermic reaction), the enthalpy of formation is positive.

EVALUATING ENTHALPY. The specific enthalpy of a compound at a state other than the
standard state is found by adding the specific enthalpy change ˘h between the standard state
and the state of interest to the enthalpy of formation

h1T, p2  h°f  3 h1T, p2  h1Tref, pref2 4  h°f  ˘h  (13.9) 

That is, the enthalpy of a compound is composed of h°f, associated with the formation of the       METHODOLOGY
compound from its elements, and ˘h, associated with a change of state at constant compo-           UPDATE
sition. An arbitrary choice of datum can be used to determine ˘h, since it is a difference at
constant composition. Accordingly, ˘h can be evaluated from tabular sources such as the            When applying Eq. 13.9 to
steam tables, the ideal gas tables when appropriate, and so on. Note that as a consequence
of the enthalpy datum adopted for the stable elements, the specific enthalpy determined from       water vapor, we use the
Eq. 13.9 is often negative.

   Tables A-25 provide two values of the enthalpy of formation of water. One is for liq-
uid water and the other is for water vapor. Under equilibrium conditions, water exists only
as a liquid at 25C and 1 atm. The vapor value listed is for a hypothetical ideal gas state
in which water is a vapor at 25C and 1 atm. The difference between the two enthalpy of
formation values is given closely by the enthalpy of vaporization hfg at Tref

                                                                                                   vapor value of the en-

h°f 1g2  h°f 1l2  hfg                              (13.10)                                         thalpy of formation of wa-
                                                                                                   ter, h­°f 1g2
Similar considerations apply to other substances for which liquid and vapor values for hof are     together       , from Table  A-25
listed in Tables A-25.                                                                                            with h­ for   water

                                                                                                   vapor from the ideal gas

                                                                                                   table, Table A-23.

 13.2.2 Energy Balances for Reacting Systems

Several considerations enter when writing energy balances for systems involving combus-
tion. Some of these apply generally, without regard for whether combustion takes place. For
example, it is necessary to consider if significant work and heat transfers take place and if
the respective values are known or unknown. Also, the effects of kinetic and potential en-
ergy must be assessed. Other considerations are related directly to the occurrence of com-
bustion. For example, it is important to know the state of the fuel before combustion occurs.
Whether the fuel is a liquid, a gas, or a solid is important. It is necessary to consider whether
the fuel is premixed with the combustion air or the fuel and air enter a reactor separately. The
state of the combustion products also must be assessed. It is important to know whether the
products of combustion are a gaseous mixture or whether some of the water formed on
combustion has condensed.

CONTROL VOLUMES AT STEADY STATE

To illustrate the many considerations involved when writing energy balances for reacting
systems, we consider special cases of broad interest, highlighting the underlying as-
sumptions. Let us begin by considering the steady-state reactor shown in Fig. 13.2, in
632 Chapter 13 Reacting Mixtures and Combustion

                  CaHb at                                     W· cv
                     TF
                                                                         Combustion products
           Q· cv                                                                   at TP

Air at                                                                                              Figure 13.2 Reactor at
 TA                                                                                                steady state.

which a hydrocarbon fuel CaHb burns completely with the theoretical amount of air
according to

           CaHb       aa     bb                     1O2    3.76N22        S  aCO2       b   H2O     aa     bb  3.76N2  (13.11)
                             4                                                          2                  4

The fuel enters the reactor in a stream separate from the combustion air, which is regarded
as an ideal gas mixture. The products of combustion also are assumed to form an ideal gas
mixture. Kinetic and potential energy effects are ignored.

   With the foregoing idealizations, the mass and energy rate balances for the two-inlet,
single-exit reactor can be used to obtain the following equation on a per mole of fuel
basis:

                   #                             #

                 Qcv         Wcv                         c ahCO2    b     hH2O      aa      b
                  #           #                                     2                       4 b 3.76hN2 d
                 nF          nF

                                                                             b                   b
                                                          hF  c aa  4 b hO2  aa  4 b 3.76hN2 d                         (13.12a)

        #
where nF denotes the molar flow rate of the fuel. Note that each coefficient on the right side
of this equation is the same as the coefficient of the corresponding substance in the reaction

equation.

The first underlined term on the right side of Eq. 13.12a is the enthalpy of the exiting

gaseous products of combustion per mole of fuel. The second underlined term on the right

side is the enthalpy of the combustion air per mole of fuel. Note that the enthalpies of the

combustion products and the air have been evaluated by adding the contribution of each com-

ponent present in the respective ideal gas mixtures. The symbol hF denotes the molar en-
thalpy of the fuel. Equation 13.12a can be expressed more concisely as

                                                           #           #

                                                           Qcv      Wcv         hP      hR                             (13.12b)
                                                            #        #
                                                           nF       nF

where hP and hR denote, respectively, the enthalpies of the products and reactants per mole
of fuel.

EVALUATING ENTHALPY TERMS. Once the energy balance has been written, the next step
is to evaluate the individual enthalpy terms. Since each component of the combustion prod-
ucts is assumed to behave as an ideal gas, its contribution to the enthalpy of the products de-
pends solely on the temperature of the products, TP. Accordingly, for each component of the
products, Eq. 13.9 takes the form

                                                         h  h°f  3 h1TP2  h 1Tref2 4                                   (13.13)
                                                                                  13.2 Conservation of Energy--Reacting Systems 633

In Eq. 13.13, h°f is the enthalpy of formation from Table A-25. The second term accounts
for the change in enthalpy from the temperature Tref to the temperature TP. For several com-
mon gases, this term can be evaluated from tabulated values of enthalpy versus temperature

in Tables A-23. Alternatively, the term can be obtained by integration of the ideal gas spe-

cific heat cp obtained from Tables A-21 or some other source of data. A similar approach
would be employed to evaluate the enthalpies of the oxygen and nitrogen in the combus-

tion air. For these

                                               0

                                     h  h°f  3 h1TA2  h1Tref2 4                                                 (13.14)

where TA is the temperature of the air entering the reactor. Note that the enthalpy of forma-
tion for oxygen and nitrogen is zero by definition and thus drops out of Eq. 13.14 as indi-

cated. The evaluation of the enthalpy of the fuel is also based on Eq. 13.9. If the fuel can be

modeled as an ideal gas, the fuel enthalpy is obtained using an expression of the same form

as Eq. 13.13 with the temperature of the incoming fuel replacing TP.
   With the foregoing considerations, Eq. 13.12a takes the form

#      #                                                                                              0

Qcv    Wcv             a1h°f      ˘h2CO2          b  1h°f    ˘h2H2O      aa       b  b  3.76  1  h°f     ˘h2N2
 #      #                                         2                               4
nF     nF

                                     b         0                         b              0

     1h°f            ˘h2F     aa      b  1h°f        ˘h2O2       aa       b  3.761h°f       ˘h2N2               (13.15a)
                                     4                                   4

The terms set to zero in this expression are the enthalpies of formation of oxygen and
nitrogen.

   Equation 13.15a can be written more concisely as

                       #          #

                     Qcv      Wcv        a    ne1h°f       ˘h2e      a   ni 1h°f     ˘h2i                (13.15b)
                      #        #
                     nF       nF           P                          R

where i denotes the incoming fuel and air streams and e the exiting combustion products.
The coefficients ni and ne correspond to the respective coefficients of the reaction equation
giving the moles of reactants and products per mole of fuel, respectively. Although Eqs. 13.15
have been developed with reference to the reaction of Eq. 13.11, equations having the same
general forms would be obtained for other combustion reactions.

   In Examples 13.4 and 13.5, the energy balance is applied together with tabular property
data to analyze control volumes at steady state involving combustion.

E X A M P L E 1 3 . 4 Analyzing an Internal Combustion Engine

Liquid octane enters an internal combustion engine operating at steady state with a mass flow rate of 1.8  103 kg/s and is
mixed with the theoretical amount of air. The fuel and air enter the engine at 25C and 1 atm. The mixture burns completely
and combustion products leave the engine at 890 K. The engine develops a power output of 37 kW. Determine the rate of heat
transfer from the engine, in kW, neglecting kinetic and potential energy effects.

SOLUTION

Known: Liquid octane and the theoretical amount of air enter an internal combustion engine operating at steady state in sep-
arate streams at 25C, 1 atm. Combustion is complete and the products exit at 890 K. The power developed by the engine and
fuel mass flow rate are specified.

Find: Determine the rate of heat transfer from the engine, in kW.
634 Chapter 13 Reacting Mixtures and Combustion
    Schematic and Given Data:

Air at 77°F, 1 atm             Drive                 50 hp
                               shaft
                                                Combustion products              Assumptions:
                                                       at 1140°F
                                                                                 1. The control volume identified by a dashed line on
                                               Fuel at 77°F, 1 atm               the accompanying figure operates at steady state.
                                                                                 2. Kinetic and potential energy effects can be ignored.
                                                                                 3. The combustion air and the products of combus-
                                                                                 tion each form ideal gas mixtures.
                                                                                 4. Each mole of oxygen in the combustion air is ac-
                                                                                 companied by 3.76 moles of nitrogen. The nitrogen is
                                                                                 inert and combustion is complete.

                                                                                  Figure E13.4

Analysis: The balanced chemical equation for complete combustion with the theoretical amount of air is obtained from the
solution to Example 13.1 as

                                    C8H18  12.5O2  47N2 S 8CO2  9H2O  47N2

The energy rate balance reduces, with assumptions 1­3, to give

                      #          #

                      Qcv      Wcv      hP        hR
                       #        #
                      nF       nF

                                 #                                                                    0

                               Wcv      58 3 h°f      ˘h 4 CO2    9 3 h°f    ˘h 4 H2O1g2    47 3 h°f     ˘h 4 N26
                                #
                               nF

                                                  0               0              0          0            0

                                5 3 h°f  ˘h 4 C8H181l2  12.5 3 h°f  ˘h 4 O2  47 3 h°f  ˘h 4 N26

where each coefficient is the same as the corresponding term of the balanced chemical equation and Eq. 13.9 has been used
to evaluate enthalpy terms. The enthalpy of formation terms for oxygen and nitrogen are zero, and ˘h  0 for each of the
reactants, because the fuel and combustion air enter at 25C.

    With the enthalpy of formation for C8H18(l) from Table A-25

                                      hR  1h°f2C8H181l2  249,910 kJ/kmol 1fuel2

    With enthalpy of formation values for CO2 and H2O(g) from Table A-25, and enthalpy values for N2, H2O, and CO2 from
Table A-23

                    hP  8 3 393,520  136,876  93642 4  9 3 241,820  131,429  9,9042 4
                           47 326,568  8,669 4

                        4,069,466 kJ/kmol

Using the molecular weight of the fuel from Table A-1, the molar flow rate of the fuel is

                           #          1.8  103 kg 1fuel2/s                 1.58     105   kmol1fuel2/s
                           nF
                                    114.22 lb1fuel2kmol1fuel2

Inserting values into the expression for the rate of heat transfer

 #      #             n# F1hP    hR2
Qcv    Wcv

       37 kW             c 1.58       10  5  kmol 1fuel2  d     3 4,069,466         1249,9102 4  a       kJ        b  a 1 kW b
                                                   s                                                kmol 1fuel2        1 kJ/s

      23.3 kW
                                                                                        13.2 Conservation of Energy--Reacting Systems 635

E X A M P L E 1 3 . 5 Analyzing a Combustion Chamber

Methane gas at 400 K and 1 atm enters a combustion chamber, where it is mixed with air entering at 500 K and 1 atm. The
products of combustion exit at 1800 K and 1 atm with the product analysis given in Example 13.2. For operation at steady
state, determine the rate of heat transfer from the combustion chamber in kJ per kmol of fuel. Neglect kinetic and potential
energy effects. The average value for the specific heat cp of methane between 298 and 400 K is 38 kJ/kmol # K.

SOLUTION
Known: Methane gas, air, and combustion products enter and exit a combustion chamber at steady state in separate streams
with specified temperatures and a pressure of 1 atm. An analysis of the dry products of combustion is provided.
Find: Determine the rate of heat transfer, in kJ per kmol of fuel.
Schematic and Given Data:

                 CH4(g)
              400 K, 1 atm

    Air at                                 Combustion products
500 K, 1 atm                                   1800 K, 1 atm

                                                                      Figure E13.5

Assumptions:
                                                                                                                                       #

1. The control volume identified by a dashed line on the accompanying figure operates at steady state with Wcv  0.

2. Kinetic and potential energy effects can be ignored.

3. The fuel is modeled as an ideal gas with cp  38 kJ/kmol # K. The combustion air and the products of combustion each
form ideal gas mixtures.

4. Each mole of oxygen in the combustion air is accompanied by 3.76 moles of nitrogen, which is inert.

Analysis: When expressed on a per mole of fuel basis, the balanced chemical equation obtained in the solution to Example 13.2
takes the form

              CH4  2.265O2  8.515N2 S 0.951CO2  0.049CO  0.289O2  8.515N2  2H2O

The energy rate balance reduces with assumptions 1­3 to give

              #

              Qcv             hP    hR
               #
              nF

                                                                                                                                      0

                             3 0.9511h°f  ˘h2CO2  0.0491h°f  ˘h2CO  0.2891h°f  ˘h2O2

                                                   0

                               8.5151h°f  ˘h2N2  21h°f  ˘h2H2O1g2 4  3 1h°f  ˘h2CH4

                                        0                     0

                               2.2651h°f  ˘h2O2  8.5151h°f  ˘h2N2 4

where each coefficient in the equation is the same as the coefficient of the corresponding term of the balanced chemical equa-
tion and Eq. 13.9 has been used to evaluate the enthalpy terms. The enthalpies of formation for oxygen and nitrogen are set
to zero.
636 Chapter 13 Reacting Mixtures and Combustion

    Consider first the reactants. With the enthalpy of formation for methane from Table A-25, the given cp value for methane,
and enthalpy values for nitrogen and oxygen from Table A-23

hR  1h°f  cp˘T 2CH4  2.2651 ˘h2O2  8.5151 ˘h2N2
    3 74,850  381400  2982 4  2.265 3 14,770  8682 4  8.515 3 14,581  8669 4
    6844 kJ/kmol 1CH42

    Next consider the products. With enthalpy of formation values for CO2, CO, and H2O(g) from Table A-25 and enthalpy
values from Table A-23

     hP  0.951 3 393,520  188,806  93642 4
             0.049 3110,530  158,191  86692 4
             0.289160,371  86822  8.515157,651  86692
             2 3241,820  172,513  99042 4

         228,079 kJ/kmol 1CH42

Inserting values into the expression for the rate of heat transfer

#

Qcv    hP    hR    228,079                         168442             221,235  kJ/kmol  1CH42
 #
nF

CONDENSATION OF COMBUSTION PRODUCTS. When the combustion products of a hy-
drocarbon fuel are cooled sufficiently, condensation of a portion of the water formed will
occur. The energy balance must then be written to account for the presence of water in the
products as both a liquid and a vapor. For cooling of combustion products at constant pressure,
the dew point temperature method of Example 13.2 is used to determine the temperature at
the onset of condensation.

CLOSED SYSTEMS

Let us consider next a closed system involving a combustion process. In the absence of ki-
netic and potential energy effects, the appropriate form of the energy balance is

                                           UP  UR  Q  W

where UR denotes the internal energy of the reactants and UP denotes the internal energy of
the products. If the reactants and products form ideal gas mixtures, the energy balance can
be expressed as

                                                   a nu  a nu  Q  W                            (13.16)

                                                   P                  R

where the coefficients n on the left side are the coefficients of the reaction equation giving
the moles of each reactant or product.

   Since each component of the reactants and products behaves as an ideal gas, the respec-
tive specific internal energies of Eq. 13.16 can be evaluated as u  h  RT, so the equation
becomes

                   Q  W  a n1h  RTP2  a n1h  RTR2                                              (13.17a)

                                                      P                        R
                    13.2 Conservation of Energy--Reacting Systems 637

where TP and TR denote the temperature of the products and reactants, respectively. With ex-
pressions of the form of Eq. 13.13 for each of the reactants and products, Eq. 13.17a can be
written alternatively as

Q  W  a n1h°f  ˘h  RTP2  a n1h°f  ˘h  RTR2

         P       R

 a n1h°f  ˘h2  a n1h°f  ˘h2  RTP a n  RTR a n (13.17b)

         P    R     P                       R

The enthalpy of formation terms are obtained from Table A-25. The ˘h terms are evaluated
as discussed above.

   The foregoing concepts are illustrated in Example 13.6, where a gaseous mixture burns
in a closed, rigid container.

E X A M P L E 1 3 . 6 Analyzing Combustion at Constant Volume

A mixture of 1 kmol of gaseous methane and 2 kmol of oxygen initially at 25C and 1 atm burns completely in a closed, rigid
container. Heat transfer occurs until the products are cooled to 900 K. If the reactants and products each form ideal gas mix-
tures, determine (a) the amount of heat transfer, in kJ, and (b) the final pressure, in atm.

SOLUTION
Known: A mixture of gaseous methane and oxygen, initially at 25C and 1 atm, burns completely within a closed rigid con-
tainer. The products are cooled to 900 K.
Find: Determine the amount of heat transfer, in kJ, and the final pressure of the combustion products, in atm.
Schematic and Given Data:

1kmol CH4(g)        Products of
  2 kmol O2
  T1 = 25°C         combustion
  p1 = 1 atm
                         T2
                         p2

State 1             State 2                     Figure E13.6

Assumptions:

1. The contents of the closed, rigid container are taken as the system.
2. Kinetic and potential energy effects are absent, and W  0.
3. Combustion is complete.
4. The initial mixture and the products of combustion each form ideal gas mixtures.
5. The initial and final states are equilibrium states.

Analysis: The chemical reaction equation for the complete combustion of methane with oxygen is
                                                           CH4  2O2 S CO2  2H2O
638 Chapter 13 Reacting Mixtures and Combustion

(a) With assumptions 2 and 3, the closed system energy balance takes the form

                                                       0

                 UP  UR  Q  W

or

                                          Q  UP  UR  11uCO2  2uH2O1g22  11uCH4 1g2  2uO22

Each coefficient in this equation is the same as the corresponding term of the balanced chemical equation.
    Since each reactant and product behaves as an ideal gas, the respective specific internal energies can be evaluated as

u  h  RT. The energy balance then becomes

                            Q  3 11hCO2  RT22  21hH2O1g2  RT22 4  3 11hCH41g2  RT12  21hO2  RT12 4
where T1 and T2 denote, respectively, the initial and final temperatures. Collecting like terms

                                           Q  1hCO2  2hH2O1g2  hCH41g2  2hO22  3R1T1  T22
    The specific enthalpies are evaluated in terms of the respective enthalpies of formation to give

    Q  3 1h°f  ˘h2CO2  21h°f  ˘h2H2O1g2

              0                                         0           0

     1h°f  ˘h 2CH41g2  21h°f  ˘h 2O2 4  3R1T1  T22

Since the methane and oxygen are initially at 25C, ˘h  0 for each of these reactants. Also, h°f  0 for oxygen.
    With enthalpy of formation values for CO2, H2O(g), and CH4(g) from Table A-25 and enthalpy values for H2O and CO2

from Table A-23

    Q  3393,520  137,405  93642 4  2 3 241,820  131,828  99042 4
           174,8502  318.3142 1298  9002

        745,436 kJ

(b) By assumption 3, the initial mixture and the products of combustion each form ideal gas mixtures. Thus, for the
reactants

                                                 p1V  nR RT1

where nR is the total number of moles of reactants and p1 is the initial pressure. Similarly, for the products

                                                 p2V  nP RT2

where nP is the total number of moles of products and p2 is the final pressure.
    Since nR  nP  3 and volume is constant, these equations combine to give

    p2    T2  p1                                 a 900  Kb 11 atm2     3.02 atm
          T1                                      298   K

     13.2.3 Enthalpy of Combustion and Heating Values

    Although the enthalpy of formation concept underlies the formulations of the energy bal-
    ances for reactive systems presented thus far, the enthalpy of formation of fuels is not always
    tabulated.  for example. . . fuel oil and coal are normally composed of several indi-
    vidual chemical substances, the relative amounts of which may vary considerably, depend-
    ing on the source. Owing to the wide variation in composition that these fuels can exhibit,
    we do not find their enthalpies of formation listed in Tables A-25 or similar compilations of
    thermophysical data.  In many cases of practical interest, however, the enthalpy of com-
    bustion, which is accessible experimentally, can be used to conduct an energy analysis when
    enthalpy of formation data are lacking.
                      13.2 Conservation of Energy--Reacting Systems 639

   The enthalpy of combustion hRP is defined as the difference between the enthalpy of the enthalpy of combustion
products and the enthalpy of the reactants when complete combustion occurs at a given tem-
perature and pressure. That is

hRP  a ne he  a nihi                                      (13.18)

P     R

where the n's correspond to the respective coefficients of the reaction equation giving the                               higher and lower
moles of reactants and products per mole of fuel. When the enthalpy of combustion is ex-                                  heating values
pressed on a unit mass of fuel basis, it is designated hRP. Tabulated values are usually given
at the standard temperature Tref and pressure pref introduced in Sec. 13.2.1. The symbol h°RP
or h°RP is used for data at this temperature and pressure.

   The heating value of a fuel is a positive number equal to the magnitude of the enthalpy
of combustion. Two heating values are recognized by name: the higher heating value (HHV)
and the lower heating value (LHV). The higher heating value is obtained when all the wa-
ter formed by combustion is a liquid; the lower heating value is obtained when all the water
formed by combustion is a vapor. The higher heating value exceeds the lower heating value
by the energy that would be required to vaporize the liquid formed. Values for the HHV and
LHV also depend on whether the fuel is a liquid or a gas. Heating value data for several
hydrocarbons are provided in Tables A-25.

   The calculation of the enthalpy of combustion, and the associated heating value, using
table data is illustrated in the next example.

E X A M P L E 1 3 . 7 Calculating Enthalpy of Combustion

Calculate the enthalpy of combustion of gaseous methane, in kJ per kg of fuel, (a) at 25C, 1 atm with liquid water in the
products, (b) at 25C, 1 atm with water vapor in the products. (c) Repeat part (b) at 1000 K, 1 atm.

SOLUTION

Known: The fuel is gaseous methane.
Find: Determine the enthalpy of combustion, in kJ per kg of fuel, (a) at 25C, 1 atm with liquid water in the products,
(b) at 25C, 1 atm with water vapor in the products, (c) at 1000 K, 1 atm with water vapor in the products.
Assumptions:
1. Each mole of oxygen in the combustion air is accompanied by 3.76 moles of nitrogen, which is inert.
2. Combustion is complete, and both reactants and products are at the same temperature and pressure.
3. The ideal gas model applies for methane, the combustion air, and the gaseous products of combustion.
Analysis: The combustion equation is

                                              CH4  2O2  7.52N2 S CO2  2H2O  7.52N2
    The enthalpy of combustion is, from Eq. 13.18

hRP  a ne1h°f  ˘h2e  a ni 1h°f  ˘h2i

   P                  R

Introducing the coefficients of the combustion equation and evaluating the specific enthalpies in terms of the respective
enthalpies of formation

hRP  hCO2  2hH2O  hCH41g2  2hO2

                                                                                                                       0

     1h°f  ˘h2CO2  21h°f  ˘h2H2O  1h°f  ˘h2CH41g2  21h°f  ˘h2O2
640 Chapter 13 Reacting Mixtures and Combustion

  For nitrogen, the enthalpy terms of the reactants and products cancel. Also, the enthalpy of formation of oxygen is zero by
  definition. On rearrangement, the enthalpy of combustion expression becomes

                          hRP  1h°f2CO2  21h°f2H2O  1h°f2CH41g2  3 1 ˘h2CO2  21 ˘h2H2O  1 ˘h2CH41g2  21 ˘h2O2 4
                               h°RP  3 1 ˘h2CO2  21 ˘h2H2O  1 ˘h2CH41g2  21 ˘h2O2 4

  The values for h°RP and (˘h)H2O depend on whether the water in the products is a liquid or a vapor.
  (a) Since the reactants and products are at 25C, 1 atm in this case, the ˘h terms drop out of the above expression for hRP.
  Thus, for liquid water in the products, the enthalpy of combustion is

                                                   h°RP  1h°f2CO2  21h°f2H2O1l2  1h°f2CH41g2
  With enthalpy of formation values from Table A-25

                                h°RP  393,520  21285,8302  174,8502  890,330 kJ/kmol 1fuel2

  Dividing by the molecular weight of methane places this result on a unit mass of fuel basis
                                                    890,330 kJ/kmol 1fuel2

                                 h°RP  16.04 kg 1fuel2 kmol 1fuel2  55,507 kJ/kg 1fuel2

  which agrees with the higher heating value of methane given in Table A-25.
  (b) As in part (a), the ˘h terms drop out of the above expression for hRP, which for water vapor in the products reduces to
  h°RP, where

                                                       h°RP  1h°f2CO2  21h°f2H2O1g2  1h°f2CH41g2
      With enthalpy of formation values from Table A-25

                                h°RP  393,520  21241,8202  174,8502  802,310 kJ/kmol 1fuel2
  On a unit of mass of fuel basis, the enthalpy of combustion for this case is

                       h°RP     802,310                50,019             kJ/kg fuel
                                  16.04

  which agrees with the lower heating value of methane given in Table A-25.

  (c) For the case where the reactants and products are at 1000 K, 1 atm, the term h°RP in the above expression for hRP has the
  value determined in part (b): h°RP  802,310 kJ/kmol (fuel), and the ˘h terms for O2, H2O(g), and CO2 can be evaluated
  using specific enthalpies at 298 and 1000 K from Table A-23. The results are

                      1 ˘h2O2  31,389  8682  22,707 kJ/kmol
                   1 ˘h2H2O1g2  35,882  9904  25,978 kJ/kmol

                     1 ˘h2CO2  42,769  9364  33,405 kJ/kmol

  For methane, the cp expression of Table A-21 can be used to obtain

  1 ˘h2CH41g2    1000  cp dT

                298

                                3.979            T2    24.558         T3    22.733            T4    6.963  T  5    1000
                                 103             2       106          3       109             4     1012
                R  a3.826 T                                                                                      b
                                                                                                           5 298

   38,189 kJ/kmol 1fuel2

  Substituting values into the expression for the enthalpy of combustion

  hRP  802,310  3 33,405  2125,9782  38,189  2122,7072 4
       800,522 kJ/kmol 1fuel2
                                                                                          13.3 Determining the Adiabatic Flame Temperature 641

     On a unit mass basis                            hRP        800,552              49,910     kJ/kg  1fuel2
                                                                  16.04


 Using Interactive Thermodynamics: IT, we get 38,180 kJ/kmol (fuel).

 Comparing the values of parts (b) and (c), the enthalpy of combustion of methane is seen to vary little with temperature.

    The same is true for many hydrocarbon fuels. This fact is sometimes used to simplify combustion calculations.

When enthalpy of formation data are available for all the reactants and products, the enthalpy

of combustion can be calculated directly from Eq. 13.18, as illustrated in Example 13.7. Other-

wise, it must be obtained experimentally using devices known as calorimeters. Both constant-

volume (bomb calorimeters) and flow-through devices are employed for this purpose. Consider

as an illustration a reactor operating at steady state in which the fuel is burned completely with

air. For the products to be returned to the same temperature as the reactants, a heat transfer from

the reactor would be required. From an energy rate balance, the required heat transfer is

                                             #

                                           Qcv       a    ne he          a    ni hi                             (13.19)
                                            #
                                           nF          P                   R

wpweihrtehmrethotelheedoesffyinmfuinbegol,lseQq# hcuvaavnt#eiFo,tnhw,eoEsuqal.md1eb3e.s1i8dg,entiwefirecmahniancveeedahfsrRoiPnmpmrQe#evcaivosnuu# Frs.eddInisdcaauctsacs.oiroCdnoswm. iTpthahretihnhegeuaEtsqut.raal1n3ssi.fg1en9r

convention for heat transfer, the enthalpy of combustion would be negative.

As noted previously, the enthalpy of combustion can be used for energy analyses of re-

acting systems.  for example. . . consider a control volume at steady state for which

the energy rate balance takes the form

                           #         #

                    Qcv            Wcv          a    ne 1h°f       ˘h2e       a      ni 1h°f    ˘h2i
                     #              #
                    nF             nF             P                             R

All symbols have the same significance as in previous discussions. This equation can be re-

arranged to read

#                          #

Qcv                 Wcv            a    ne 1h°f2e      a      ni 1h°f2i    a    ne1 ˘h2e        a     ni1 ˘h2i
 #                   #
nF                  nF               P                   R                   P                    R

For a complete reaction, the underlined term is just the enthalpy of combustion h°RP, at Tref

and pref. Thus, the equation becomes

                              #         #

                              Qcv       Wcv     h°RP          a    ne1 ˘h2e          a    ni1 ˘h2i              (13.20)
                               #         #
                              nF        nF                      P                      R

The right side of Eq. 13.20 can be evaluated with an experimentally determined value for

h°RP and ˘h values for the reactants and products determined as discussed previously. 

13.3 Determining the Adiabatic
          Flame Temperature

                                                                                                              #
Let us reconsider the reactor at steady state pictured in Fig. 13.2. In the absence of work Wcv
and appreciable kinetic and potential energy effects, the energy liberated on combustion is trans-

ferred from the reactor in two ways only: by energy accompanying the exiting combustion

products and by heat transfer to the surroundings. The smaller the heat transfer, the greater the
642 Chapter 13 Reacting Mixtures and Combustion

adiabatic flame  energy carried out with the combustion products and thus the greater the temperature of the prod-
temperature      ucts. The temperature that would be achieved by the products in the limit of adiabatic operation
                 of the reactor is called the adiabatic flame temperature or adiabatic combustion temperature.

                    The adiabatic flame temperature can be determined by use of the conservation of mass
                 and conservation of energy principles. To illustrate the procedure, let us suppose that the
                 combustion air and the combustion products each form ideal gas mixtures. Then, with the
                 other assumptions stated above, the energy rate balance on a per mole of fuel basis, Eq. 13.12b,
                 reduces to the form hP  hR--that is

                                                    a nehe  a nihi                 (13.21a)

                                                    P  R

                 where i denotes the incoming fuel and air streams and e the exiting combustion products.

                 With this expression, the adiabatic flame temperature can be determined using table data or

                 computer software, as follows.

                 USING TABLE DATA. When using Eq. 13.9 with table data to evaluate enthalpy terms,
                 Eq. 13.21a takes the form

                                                 a ne 1h°f  ˘h2e  a ni 1h°f  ˘h2i

                                                 P     R

                 or

                     a ne 1 ˘h2e  a ni 1 ˘h2i  a ni h°fi  a neh°fe                 (13.21b)

                     P                              R     R         P

                 The n's are obtained on a per mole of fuel basis from the balanced chemical reaction equation.
                 The enthalpies of formation of the reactants and products are obtained from Table A-25 or
                 A-25E. Enthalpy of combustion data might be employed in situations where the enthalpy of
                 formation for the fuel is not available. Knowing the states of the reactants as they enter the re-
                 actor, the ˘h terms for the reactants can be evaluated as discussed previously. Thus, all terms
                 on the right side of Eq. 13.21b can be evaluated. The terms ( ˘h)e on the left side account for
                 the changes in enthalpy of the products from Tref to the unknown adiabatic flame temperature.
                 Since the unknown temperature appears in each term of the sum on the left side of the equa-
                 tion, determination of the adiabatic flame temperature requires iteration: A temperature for the
                 products is assumed and used to evaluate the left side of Eq. 13.21b. The value obtained is
                 compared with the previously determined value for the right side of the equation. The proce-
                 dure continues until satisfactory agreement is attained. Example 13.8 gives an illustration.

                 USING COMPUTER SOFTWARE. Thus far we have emphasized the use of Eq. 13.9 together
                 with table data when evaluating the specific enthalpies required by energy balances for re-
                 acting systems. Such enthalpy values also can be retrieved using Interactive Thermodynam-
                 ics: IT. With IT, the quantities on the right side of Eq. 13.9 are evaluated by software, and
                 h data are returned directly.  for example. . . consider CO2 at 500 K modeled as an
                 ideal gas. The specific enthalpy is obtained from IT as follows:

                     T = 500 // K
                     h = h_T("CO2", T)

                 Choosing K for the temperature unit and moles for the amount under the Units menu, IT re-
                 turns h  3.852  105 kJ/kmol.

                    This value agrees with the value calculated from Eq. 13.9 using enthalpy data for CO2
                 from Table A-23, as follows

                                                   h  h°f  3 h1500 K2  h1298 K2 4
                                                      393,520  317,678  9364 4
                                                      3.852  105 kJ/kmol 
                                                                                         13.3 Determining the Adiabatic Flame Temperature 643

   As suggested by this discussion, IT is also useful for analyzing reacting systems. In par-
ticular, the equation solver and property retrieval features of IT allow the adiabatic flame
temperature to be determined without the iteration required when using table data. This is
illustrated in Example 13.8.

E X A M P L E 1 3 . 8 Determining the Adiabatic Flame Temperature

Liquid octane at 25C, 1 atm enters a well-insulated reactor and reacts with air entering at the same temperature and pressure.
For steady-state operation and negligible effects of kinetic and potential energy, determine the temperature of the combustion
products for complete combustion with (a) the theoretical amount of air, (b) 400% theoretical air.

SOLUTION
Known: Liquid octane and air, each at 25C and 1 atm, burn completely within a well-insulated reactor operating at steady
state.

Find: Determine the temperature of the combustion products for (a) the theoretical amount of air and (b) 400% theoretical
air.

Schematic and Given Data:

                C8H18(l)
              25°C, 1 atm

                                   Insulation

     Air                                       Combustion products,
25°C, 1 atm                                               TP

                                                                      Figure E13.8

Assumptions:

1. The control volume indicated on the accompanying figure by a dashed line operates at steady state.

                            #   #

2. For the control volume, Qcv  0, Wcv  0, and kinetic and potential effects are negligible.

3. The combustion air and the products of combustion each form ideal gas mixtures.

4. Combustion is complete.

5. Each mole of oxygen in the combustion air is accompanied by 3.76 moles of nitrogen, which is inert.

Analysis: At steady state, the control volume energy rate balance Eq. 13.12b reduces with assumptions 2 and 3 to give
Eq. 13.21a

                                               a ne he  a ni hi                                         (1)

                                               P  R

When Eq. 13.9 and table data are used to evaluate the enthalpy terms, Eq. (1) is written as

                                      a ne1h°f  ˘h2e  a ni 1h°f  ˘h2i

                                      P           R

On rearrangement, this becomes

                                   a ne1 ˘h2e  a ni 1 ˘h2i  a ni h°fi  a ne h°fe

                                   P           R     R               P
644 Chapter 13 Reacting Mixtures and Combustion

which corresponds to Eq. 13.21b. Since the reactants enter at 25C, the (˘h)i terms on the right side vanish, and the energy
rate equation becomes

              a ne1 ˘h2e  a ni h°fi  a ne h°fe                                                                 (2)

              P                                  R                     P

(a) For combustion of liquid octane with the theoretical amount of air, the chemical equation is

C8H181l2  12.5O2  47N2 S 8CO2  9H2O1g2  47N2

Introducing the coefficients of this equation, Eq. (2) takes the form

              81 ˘h2CO2  91 ˘h2H2O1g2  471 ˘h2N2

                                                                       0  0

               3 1h°f2C8H181l2  12.51h°f2O2  471h°f2N2 4

                                                                                    0

                  3 81h°f2CO2  91h°f2H2O1g2  471h°f2N2 4

The right side of the above equation can be evaluated with enthalpy of formation data from Table A-25, giving

                                     81 ˘h2CO2  91 ˘h2H2O1g2  471 ˘h2N2  5,074,630 kJ/kmol 1fuel2

Each ˘h term on the left side of this equation depends on the temperature of the products, TP. This temperature can be de-
termined by an iterative procedure.

    The following table gives a summary of the iterative procedure for three trial values of TP. Since the summation of the en-
thalpies of the products equals 5,074,630 kJ/kmol, the actual value of TP is in the interval from 2350 to 2400 K. Interpolation
between these temperatures gives TP  2395 K.

81 ˘h2CO2         2500 K                             2400 K                2350 K
91 ˘h2H2O1g2       975,408                            926,304               901,816
471 ˘h2N2          890,676                            842,436               818,478
                 3,492,664                          3,320,597             3,234,869
a ne1 ˘h2e
                 5,358,748                          5,089,337             4,955,163
  P

Alternative Solution:
The following IT code can be used as an alternative to iteration with table data, where hN2_R and hN2_P denote the enthalpy
of N2 in the reactants and products, respectively, and so on. In the Units menu, select temperature in K and amount of substance
in moles.

    TR = 25 + 273.15 // K

    // Evaluate reactant and product enthalpies, hR and hP, respectively
    hR = hC8H18 + 12.5 * hO2_R + 47 * hN2_R
    hP = 8 * hCO2_P + 9 * hH2O_P + 47 * hN2_P

    hC8H18 = ­249910 // kJ/kmol (Value from Table A-25)
    hO2_R = h_T("O2'',TR)
    hN2_R = h_T("N2'',TR)
    hCO2_P = h_T("CO2'',TP)
    hH2O_P = h_T("H2O'',TP)
    hN2_P = h_T("N2'',TP)

    // Energy balance
    hP = hR

Using the Solve button, the result is TP = 2394 K, which agrees closely with the result obtained above.
(b) For complete combustion of liquid octane with 400% theoretical air, the chemical equation is

                                    C8H181l2  50O2  188N2 S 8CO2  9H2O  37.5O2  188N2
                                                                                                                                             13.4 Fuel Cells 645

     Equation (2), the energy rate balance, reduces for this case to
                                 81 ˘h2CO2  91 ˘h2H2O1g2  37.51 ˘h2O2  1881 ˘h2N2  5,074,630 kJ/kmol 1fuel2

     Observe that the right side has the same value as in part (a). Proceeding iteratively as above, the temperature of the products

 is TP  962 K. The use of IT to solve part (b) is left as an exercise.

     The temperature determined in part (b) is considerably lower than the value found in part (a). This shows that once enough

          oxygen has been provided for complete combustion, bringing in more air dilutes the combustion products, lowering their
          temperature.

CLOSING COMMENTS. For a specified fuel and specified temperature and pressure of the
reactants, the maximum adiabatic flame temperature is for complete combustion with the the-
oretical amount of air. The measured value of the temperature of the combustion products
may be several hundred degrees below the calculated maximum adiabatic flame temperature,
however, for several reasons:

 Once adequate oxygen has been provided to permit complete combustion, bringing in
   more air dilutes the combustion products, lowering their temperature.

 Incomplete combustion also tends to reduce the temperature of the products, and com-
   bustion is seldom complete (see Sec. 14.4).

 Heat losses can be reduced but not altogether eliminated.

 As a result of the high temperatures achieved, some of the combustion products may
   dissociate. Endothermic dissociation reactions lower the product temperature. The effect
   of dissociation on the adiabatic flame temperature is considered in Sec. 14.4.

13.4 Fuel Cells                                                                                    fuel cell

A fuel cell is an electrochemical device in which fuel and an oxidizer (normally oxygen from
air) undergo a chemical reaction, providing electrical current to an external circuit and pro-
ducing products. The fuel and oxidizer react catalytically in stages on separate electrodes:
the anode and the cathode. An electrolyte separating the two electrodes allows passage of
ions formed by reaction. Depending on the type of fuel cell, the ions may be positively or
negatively charged. The reaction is not a combustion process.

    Rates of reaction in fuel cells are limited by the time it takes for diffusion of chemical
species through the electrodes and the electrolyte and by the speed of the chemical reactions
themselves. These features, together with other aspects of fuel cell operation, result in in-
ternal irreversibilities that are inherently less significant than encountered in power producing
devices relying on combustion.

    By avoiding highly irreversible combustion, fuel cells have the potential of providing more
power from a given supply of fuel and oxidizer, while forming fewer undesirable products,
than internal combustion engines and gas turbines. In contrast to power plants studied in pre-
vious chapters, fuel cells can produce electric power without moving parts or utilizing
intermediate heat exchangers. Fuel cells do not operate as thermodynamic power cycles, and
thus the notion of a limiting thermal efficiency imposed by the second law is not applicable.
Despite these thermodynamic advantages, widespread use of fuel cells has not occurred thus
far owing primarily to cost.

    For scale, Fig. 13.3a shows a solid oxide fuel cell module. Figure 13.3b gives the
schematic of a proton exchange membrane fuel cell, which is discussed next as a repre-
sentative case.
646 Chapter 13 Reacting Mixtures and Combustion

                                                 External electric circuit

                                                                                          2e­

                                                           Fuel                    2e­                 2e­                      Oxidizer
                                                            H2                                                                      ­1
                                                                                                                                    2   O2
                                                 H2  2H+ + 2e­
                                                                                          2H+                   1­  O2      ­1  O2  +   2H+  +  2e­    H2O
                                                                               H2                               2           2

                                                                                   Anode  Electrolyte  Cathode  H2O

                                                                                                                         Product
                                                                                                                           H2O

                                                 Overall cell reaction: H2 +                                            1­  O2      H2O
                                                                                                                        2

(a)                                                                                       (b)

 Figure 13.3 Fuel cell power systems. (a) 25-kW solid oxide fuel cell module. (b) Schematic of
a proton exchange membrane fuel cell.

PROTON EXCHANGE MEMBRANE FUEL CELL. The fuel cell shown in Fig. 13.3b operates
with hydrogen (H2) as the fuel and oxygen (O2) as the oxidizer. This type of cell is known
as a proton exchange membrane cell (PEMFC). At the anode, hydrogen ions (H) and elec-
trons are produced. At the cathode, ions and electrons are consumed. The reactions at these
electrodes and the overall cell reaction are labeled on the figure. The only products of this
fuel cell are water and the power generated.

   Charge-carrying hydrogen ions are conducted through the electrolytic membrane. For ac-
ceptable ion conductivity, a high membrane water content is required. This requirement restricts
the fuel cell to operating in the range 60­100C, which is below the boiling point of water.
Cooling is generally needed to maintain the fuel cell at the operating temperature. Due to such
relatively low temperature operation, costly platinum catalysts are required at both the anode
and cathode to increase ionization reaction rates. Catalytic activity is more important in lower
temperature fuel cells because reaction rates tend to decrease with decreasing temperature.

   Major automakers are beginning to introduce vehicles powered by proton exchange mem-
brane fuel cells. Fuel cell stacks formed from several hundred individual fuel cells are required
to meet automotive needs. These fuel cell stacks are integrated with several components
necessary to support fuel cell operation, including components that provide fuel, oxidizer,
and coolant. Power requirements, irreversibilities, and losses associated with the support
components conspire to give a much lower net power output for a given fuel input than
obtainable from the stand-alone fuel cell.

   Proton exchange membrane fuel cells also have potential to replace batteries in portable
devices such as cellular phones, laptop computers, and video players.

FUELS. With today's technology, hydrogen is preferred for fuel cell applications because of its
exceptional ability to produce electrons when suitable catalysts are used, while in principle pro-
ducing no harmful emissions from the fuel cell itself. Methanol (CH3OH) and carbon monoxide
can be used directly as fuels in some applications, but often with performance penalties.

   Since hydrogen is not naturally occurring, it must be produced chemically from hydro-
carbons, including natural gas, by electrolysis of water, or by other means. Hydrogen pro-
duction technologies involving chemical processes can generate undesirable emissions.
Irreversibilities and losses inherent in hydrogen production also result in a lower overall con-
version of primary input to fuel cell-generated power than reported for fuel cells directly
fueled with hydrogen.

   In some applications, hydrogen is provided directly to the fuel cell from storage as a com-
pressed gas, a cryogenic liquid, or atoms absorbed within metallic structures. Hydrogen also
                                                                                                13.4 Fuel Cells 647

Thermodynamics in the News...

Goodbye Batteries, Hello Fuel Cells?                               stakes are high in the
                                                                   consumer electronics
Power needs of cellular phones, laptops, and other portable        market.
electronic devices are increasing so rapidly that the battery in-
dustry is struggling to keep up. Some observers say that               Like the fuel cells
today's batteries won't be able to provide enough power, are       being developed to
too heavy, and don't last long enough to meet the needs of         power cars and gen-
quickly evolving electronics. Pocket-size fuel cells might prove   erate electricity for
to be a viable alternative.                                        homes and offices, the
                                                                   pocket-size versions
    To meet consumer needs, companies are rushing to develop       face stiff challenges
small fuel cells that promise to provide power up to 10 times      on the way to market.
longer on a single charge than conventional batteries.These cells  They rely on costly
can be charged instantly just by adding more fuel. Battery com-    precious-metal cata-
panies are fighting back with a new generation of batteries,       lysts to operate and are difficult to manufacture. They run on
known as lithium ion batteries, already used in watches, flash     combustible fuels, typically hydrogen or methanol, and this
cameras, and rechargeable power packs. Lithium ion batteries       brings concerns over safety. Still, many think fuel cells for
provide several times the output of similar-size alkaline batter-  portable electronics will be the first fuel cells most of us will
ies and can be recharged numerous times.To compete, fuel cells     see because of strong consumer demand for cost-competitive,
must prove themselves as reliable and versatile as batteries, and  longer lasting, instantly rechargeable power.

can be produced at the point of use. Internal reforming refers to applications where hydrogen
production is integrated with the fuel cell. When hydrogen is produced separately from the
fuel cell itself, this is known as external reforming. Owing to thermal limitations of current
technology, internal reforming is feasible only in higher-temperature molten carbonate and
solid oxide fuel cells.

   Table 13.1 summarizes the most promising fuel cell technologies currently under investi-
gation. Included are potential applications and other characteristics. For more detailed
discussions, see the sources listed in Table 13.1.

TABLE 13.1 Characteristics of Major Fuel Cell Types

                    Proton                 Phosphoric Acid         Molten                       Solid Oxide Fuel
                    Exchange               Fuel Cell (PAFC)        Carbonate Fuel               Cell (SOFC)
                    Membrane Fuel                                  Cell (MCFC)
                    Cell (PEMFC)                                                                - vehicle auxiliary
                                                                   - on-site cogeneration        power
Transportation      - automotive power     - large vehicle power   - electric power
   application                                                                                  - heavy vehicle
                                                                    generation                   propulsion
Other applications  - portable power       - on-site cogeneration  liquid molten carbonate
Electrolyte         - small-scale          - electric power                                     - on-site cogeneration
                                                                                                - electric power
                     stationary power       generation
                                                                                                 generation
                    ion exchange membrane  liquid phosphoric acid                               solid oxide ceramic

Charge carrier          H                                H            CO3                           O
                    60 ­100C                         150­220C      600­700C                     800­1000C
Operating
   temperature

Fuel reforming      external                         external      internal or external         internal or external

Source: Appleby, A. J., and Foulkes, F. R., 1993, Fuel Cell Handbook, Krieger Publishing Company, Malabar, Florida. Hirschenhofer, J. H.,
Stauffer, D. B., Engleman, R. R., and Klett, M. G., 1998, Fuel Cell Handbook, Fourth Edition, DOE/FETC-99/1076.
648 Chapter 13 Reacting Mixtures and Combustion

                  13.5 Absolute Entropy and the
                             Third Law of Thermodynamics

                  Thus far our analyses of reacting systems have been conducted using the conservation of
                  mass and conservation of energy principles. In the present section some of the implications
                  of the second law of thermodynamics for reacting systems are considered. The discussion
                  continues in the second part of this chapter dealing with the exergy concept, and in the next
                  chapter where the subject of chemical equilibrium is taken up.

third law of       13.5.1 Evaluating Entropy for Reacting Systems
thermodynamics
                  The property entropy plays an important part in quantitative evaluations using the second law
absolute entropy  of thermodynamics. When reacting systems are under consideration, the same problem arises
                  for entropy as for enthalpy and internal energy: A common datum must be used to assign
                  entropy values for each substance involved in the reaction. This is accomplished using the
                  third law of thermodynamics and the absolute entropy concept.

                     The third law deals with the entropy of substances at the absolute zero of temperature. Based
                  on empirical evidence, this law states that the entropy of a pure crystalline substance is zero at
                  the absolute zero of temperature, 0 K. Substances not having a pure crystalline structure at
                  absolute zero have a nonzero value of entropy at absolute zero. The experimental evidence
                  on which the third law is based is obtained primarily from studies of chemical reactions at low
                  temperatures and specific heat measurements at temperatures approaching absolute zero.

                  ABSOLUTE ENTROPY. For present considerations, the importance of the third law is that it
                  provides a datum relative to which the entropy of each substance participating in a reaction can
                  be evaluated so that no ambiguities or conflicts arise. The entropy relative to this datum is called
                  the absolute entropy. The change in entropy of a substance between absolute zero and any
                  given state can be determined from precise measurements of energy transfers and specific heat
                  data or from procedures based on statistical thermodynamics and observed molecular data.

                     Table A-25 give the value of the absolute entropy for selected substances at the
                  standard reference state, Tref  298.15 K, pref  1 atm. Two values of absolute entropy for
                  water are provided. One is for liquid water and the other is for water vapor. As for the
                  case of the enthalpy of formation of water considered previously, the vapor value listed
                  is for a hypothetical ideal gas state in which water is a vapor at 25C and 1 atm.
                  Tables A-22 and A-23 give tabulations of absolute entropy versus temperature at a pressure
                  of 1 atm for selected gases. The absolute entropy at 1 atm and temperature T is designated
                  as s(T) or s°(T), depending on whether the value is on a unit mass or per mole basis. In
                  all these tables, ideal gas behavior is assumed for the gases.

                     When the absolute entropy is known at the standard state, the specific entropy at any other
                  state can be found by adding the specific entropy change between the two states to the absolute
                  entropy at the standard state. Similarly, when the absolute entropy is known at the pressure
                  pref and temperature T, the absolute entropy at the same temperature and any pressure p can
                  be found from

                                               s 1T, p2  s 1T, pref2  3 s 1T, p2  s 1T, pref2 4

                     The second term on the right side of this equation can be evaluated for an ideal gas by
                  using Eq. 6.21b, giving

                                                p    1ideal gas2                             (13.22)
                  s 1T, p2  s°1T 2  R ln

                                               pref

                  where s °(T ) is the absolute entropy at temperature T and pressure pref.
                                                     13.5 Absolute Entropy and the Third Law of Thermodynamics 649

   The entropy of the ith component of an ideal gas mixture is evaluated at the mixture tem-
perature T and the partial pressure pi: si (T, pi). The partial pressure is given by pi  yi p,
where yi is the mole fraction of component i and p is the mixture pressure. Thus, Eq. 13.22
takes the form

                          si 1T,  pi2     si°1T 2    R    ln  pi
                                                              pref

or

    si 1T,  pi2     si°1T 2      R  ln  yip        aciodmeaplognaesnmt iixotfuraenb  (13.23)
                                        pref

where si°(T ) is the absolute entropy of component i at temperature T and pref.

 13.5.2 Entropy Balances for Reacting Systems

Many of the considerations that enter when energy balances are written for reacting systems
also apply to entropy balances. The writing of entropy balances for reacting systems will be
illustrated by referring to special cases of broad interest.

CONTROL VOLUMES AT STEADY STATE. Let us begin by reconsidering the steady-state re-

actor of Fig. 13.2, for which the combustion reaction is given by Eq. 13.11. The combustion air

and the products of combustion are each assumed to form ideal gas mixtures. The entropy rate

balance for the two-inlet, single-exit reactor can be expressed on a per mole of fuel basis as

                 #
                 QjTj
    0  a                     sF        c aa      b            aa    b
                   #                             4 b sO2            4 b 3.76 sN2 d
             j    nF

                             b                     b                  #
                             2 sH2O                4 b 3.76 sN2 d
                 c asCO2                     aa                       scv            (13.24)
                                                                       #
                                                                      nF

        #
where nF is the molar flow rate of the fuel and the coefficients appearing in the underlined
terms are the same as those for the corresponding substances in the reaction equation.

    The specific entropies of Eq. 13.24 are absolute entropies. Let us consider how the en-

tropies are evaluated for the combustion products and the combustion air. The entropies of

the combustion products would be evaluated from Eq. 13.23, using the temperature, pres-

sure, and composition of the products. The entropies of the entering oxygen and nitrogen

would be evaluated similarly, using the temperature, pressure, and composition of the com-

bustion air. If the fuel and air entered the reactor as an ideal gas mixture, the entropies of

the mixture components would be evaluated from Eq. 13.23 using the appropriate partial

pressures. Such considerations are illustrated in Example 13.9.

    E X A M P L E 1 3 . 9 Evaluating Entropy Production for a Reactor

    Liquid octane at 25C, 1 atm enters a well-insulated reactor and reacts with air entering at the same temperature and pressure.
    The products of combustion exit at 1 atm pressure. For steady-state operation and negligible effects of kinetic and potential
    energy, determine the rate of entropy production, in kJ/K per kmol of fuel, for complete combustion with (a) the theoretical
    amount of air, (b) 400% theoretical air.

    SOLUTION

    Known: Liquid octane and air, each at 25C and 1 atm, burn completely within a well-insulated reactor operating at steady
    state. The products of combustion exit at 1 atm pressure.
650 Chapter 13 Reacting Mixtures and Combustion

Find: Determine the rate of entropy production, in kJ/K per kmol of fuel, for combustion with (a) the theoretical amount of
air, (b) 400% theoretical air.

Schematic and Given Data:

                C8H18(l)
              25°C, 1 atm

                                        Insulation

     Air                                                    Combustion products,
25°C, 1 atm                                                          1 atm

                                                             TP = 2395 K (part a)
                                                             TP = 962 K (part b)

                                                                                         Figure E13.9

Assumptions:

1. The control volume shown on the accompanying figure by a dashed line operates at steady state and without heat transfer
with its surroundings.

2. Combustion is complete. Each mole of oxygen in the combustion air is accompanied by 3.76 moles of nitrogen, which is
inert.

3. The combustion air can be modeled as an ideal gas mixture, as can the products of combustion.
4. The reactants enter at 25C, 1 atm. The products exit at a pressure of 1 atm.

Analysis: The temperature of the exiting products of combustion TP was evaluated in Example 13.8 for each of the two cases.
For combustion with the theoretical amount of air, TP  2395 K. For complete combustion with 400% theoretical air, TP  962 K.

(a) For combustion of liquid octane with the theoretical amount of air, the chemical equation is

                                     C8H181l2  12.5O2  47N2 S 8CO2  9H2O1g2  47N2
With assumptions 1 and 3, the entropy rate balance on a per mole of fuel basis, Eq. 13.24, takes the form

                      0        #     0                                                                           #
                     a        Qj Tj     sF       112.5 sO2    47 sN22        18 sCO2    9 sH2O1g2    47 sN22    scv
                                                                                                                 #
                           j    #                                                                               nF
                               nF

or on rearrangement

                              #

                              scv       18 sCO2    9 sH2O1g2    47 sN22      sF       112.5 sO2    47 sN22           (1)
                               #
                              nF

Each coefficient of this equation is the same as for the corresponding term of the balanced chemical equation.

    The fuel enters the reactor separately at Tref, pref. The absolute entropy of liquid octane required by the entropy balance is
obtained from Table A-25 as 360.79 kJ/kmol # K.

    The oxygen and nitrogen in the combustion air enter the reactor as components of an ideal gas mixture at Tref, pref. With
Eq. 13.23 and absolute entropy data from Table A-23

                                   sO2    s O°21Tref2    R  ln  yO2 pref
                                                                 pref

                                         205.03  8.314 ln 0.21  218.01 kJ/kmol # K

                                   sN2    s °N21Tref2    R    ln yN2 pref
                                                                  pref

                                         191.5  8.314 ln 0.79  193.46 kJ/kmol # K
                                                         13.5 Absolute Entropy and the Third Law of Thermodynamics 651

   The product gas exits as an ideal gas mixture at 1 atm, 2395 K with the following composition: yCO2  864  0.125,
yH2O1g2  964  0.1406, yN2  4764  0.7344. With Eq. 13.23 and absolute entropy data at 2395 K from Tables A-23

                             sCO2  s °CO2  R ln yCO2
                                   320.173  8.314 ln 0.125  337.46 kJ/kmol # K

                             sH2O  273.986  8.314 ln 0.1406  290.30 kJ/kmol # K
                              sN2  258.503  8.314 ln 0.7344  261.07 kJ/kmol # K

Inserting values into Eq.1, the expression for the rate of entropy production

                                      #

                             scv             81337.462     91290.302           471261.072
                              #
                                      nF

                                              360.79  12.51218.012  471193.462

                                            5404 kJ/kmol 1octane2 # K

Alternative Solution:

As an alternative, the following IT code can be used to determine the entropy production per mole of fuel entering, where

sigma denotes s# cvn# F, and sN2_R and sN2_P denote the entropy of N2 in the reactants and products, respectively, and so

on. In the Units menu, select temperature in K, pressure in bar, and amount of substance in moles.

TR = 25 + 273.15 // K
p = 1.01325 // bar
TP = 2394 // K (Value from the IT alternative solution to Example 13.8)

// Determine the partial pressures
pO2_R = 0.21 * p
pN2_R = 0.79 * p
pCO2_P = (8/64) * p
pH2O_P = (9/64) * p
pN2_P = (47/64) * p

         // Evaluate the absolute entropies

         sC8H18 = 360.79 // kJ/kmol K (from Table A-25)

         sO2_R = s_TP("O2'', TR, pO2_R)

         sN2_R = s_TP("N2'', TR, pN2_R)

 sCO2_P = s_TP("CO2'', TP, pCO2_P)

         sH2O_P = s_TP("H2O'', TP, pH2O_P)

         sN2_P = s_TP("N2'', TP, pN2_P)

// Evaluate the reactant and product entropies, sR and sP, respectively
sR = sC8H18 + 12.5 * sO2_R + 47 * sN2_R
sP = 8 * sCO2_P + 9 * sH2O_P + 47 * sN2_P

// Entropy balance, Eq. (1)
sigma = sP ­ sR

Using the Solve button, the result is sigma = 5404 kJ/kmol (octane) # K, which agrees with the result obtained above.
(b) The complete combustion of liquid octane with 400% theoretical air is described by the following chemical equation:

   C8H181l2  50O2  188N2 S 8CO2  9H2O1g2  37.5O2  188N2

The entropy rate balance on a per mole of fuel basis takes the form

#

scv                          18 sCO2       9 sH2O 1g2    37.5 sO2    188 sN22    sF    150 sO2    188 sN22
 #
nF
652 Chapter 13 Reacting Mixtures and Combustion

  The specific entropies of the reactants have the same values as in part (a). The product gas exits as an ideal gas mixture at 1 atm,

  962 K with the following composition: yCO2  8242.5  0.033, yH2O1g2  9242.5  0.0371, yO2  37.5242.5  0.1546,

  yN2  0.7753. With the same approach as in part (a)

       sCO2  267.12  8.314 ln 0.033  295.481 kJ/kmol # K
       sH2O  231.01  8.314 ln 0.0371  258.397 kJ/kmol # K
        sO2  242.12  8.314 ln 0.1546  257.642 kJ/kmol # K
        sN2  226.795  8.314 ln 0.7753  228.911 kJ/kmol # K

  Inserting values into the expression for the rate of entropy production

  #

  scv    81295.4812    91258.3972                             37.51257.6422          1881228.9112
   #
  nF

          360.79  501218.012  1881193.462

        9754 kJ/kmol 1octane2 # K

 The use of IT to solve part (b) is left as an exercise.

   For several gases modeled as ideal gases, IT directly returns the absolute entropies required by entropy balances for re-

      acting systems. The entropy data obtained from IT agree with values calculated from Eq. 13.23 using table data.

   Comparing the results of parts (a) and (b), note that once enough oxygen has been provided for complete combustion,

      mixing a greater amount of air with the fuel prior to combustion results in a lower product gas temperature and a greater
      rate of entropy production.

   Although the rates of entropy production calculated in this example are positive, as required by the second law, this does

      not mean that the proposed reactions necessarily would occur, for the results are based on the assumption of complete
      combustion. The possibility of achieving complete combustion with specified reactants at a given temperature and pres-
      sure can be investigated with the methods of Chap. 14, dealing with chemical equilibrium. For further discussion, see
      Sec. 14.4.1.

  CLOSED SYSTEMS. Next consider an entropy balance for a process of a closed system dur-
  ing which a chemical reaction occurs

                                                           SP  SR                adQ b  s          (13.25)
                                                                                   Tb

  SR and SP denote, respectively, the entropy of the reactants and the entropy of the products.
  When the reactants and products form ideal gas mixtures, the entropy balance can be ex-
  pressed on a per mole of fuel basis as

                                                          ns a  a          ns    1   adQb  s       (13.26)
                                                           P                     nF    T b nF
                                                                  R

  where the coefficients n on the left are the coefficients of the reaction equation giving the
  moles of each reactant or product per mole of fuel. The entropy terms would be evalu-
  ated from Eq. 13.23 using the temperature, pressure, and composition of the reactants or
  products, as appropriate. The fuel would be mixed with the oxidizer, so this must be taken
  into account when determining the partial pressures of the reactants. Example 13.10
  provides an illustration of the evaluation of entropy change for combustion at constant
  volume.
                                                  13.5 Absolute Entropy and the Third Law of Thermodynamics 653

E X A M P L E 1 3 . 1 0 Entropy Change for Combustion at Constant Volume

Determine the change in entropy of the system of Example 13.6 in kJ/K.

SOLUTION

Known: A mixture of gaseous methane and oxygen, initially at 25C and 1 atm, burns completely within a closed rigid con-
tainer. The products are cooled to 900 K, 3.02 atm.

Find: Determine the change in entropy for the process in kJ/K.

Schematic and Given Data: See Fig. E13.6.

Assumptions:

1. The contents of the container are taken as the system.
2. The initial mixture can be modeled as an ideal gas mixture, as can the products of combustion.
3. Combustion is complete.

Analysis: The chemical equation for the complete combustion of methane with oxygen is

                                                           CH4  2O2 S CO2  2H2O

    The change in entropy for the process of the closed system is S  SP  SR, where SR and SP denote, respectively, the
initial and final entropies of the system. Since the initial mixture forms an ideal gas mixture (assumption 2), the entropy of
the reactants can be expressed as the sum of the contributions of the components, each evaluated at the mixture temperature
and the partial pressure of the component. That is

                                                    SR  1 sCH4 1T1, yCH4 p12  2 sO21T1, yO2 p12

where yCH4  13 and yO2  23 denote, respectively, the mole fractions of the methane and oxygen in the initial mixture. Sim-

ilarly, since the products of combustion form an ideal gas mixture (assumption 2)

                                                  Sp  1 sCO21T2, yCO2 p22  2 sH2O1T2, yH2O p22

where yCO2  13 and yH2O  23 denote, respectively, the mole fractions of the carbon dioxide and water vapor in the prod-

ucts of combustion. In these equations, p1 and p2 denote the pressure at the initial and final states, respectively.
    The specific entropies required to determine SR can be calculated from Eq. 13.23. Since T1  Tref and p1  pref, absolute

entropy data from Table A-25 can be used as follows

              sCH41T1,  yCH4 p12             s °CH4 1 Tref 2     R   ln  yCH4 pref
                                                                           pref

                                            186.16  8.314 ln 1  195.294 kJ/kmol # K
                                                                     3

Similarly

              sO21T1,   yO2 p1 2           s°O21Tref2         R  ln  yO2 pref
                                                                      pref

                                      205.03  8.314 ln 2  208.401 kJ/kmol # K
                                                               3

    At the final state, the products are at T2  900 K and p2  3.02 atm. With Eq. 13.23 and absolute entropy data from
Tables A-23

              sCO21T2,  yCO2 p2 2    s°CO21T22    R    ln     yCO2 p2
                                                               pref

                                    263.559  8.314 ln                1132 13.022     263.504 kJ/kmol # K

                                                                         1

              sH2O1T2,  yH2O p2 2    s°H2O1T22    R    ln     yH2O p2
                                                               pref

                                    228.321  8.314 ln 1232 13.022  222.503 kJ/kmol # K

                                                                     1
654 Chapter 13 Reacting Mixtures and Combustion

    Finally, the entropy change for the process is
                                            ˘S  SP  SR
                                                  3263.504  21222.5032 4  3 195.294  21208.4012 4
                                                  96.414 kJ/K

                    13.5.3 Evaluating Gibbs Function for Reacting Systems

                   The thermodynamic property known as the Gibbs function plays a role in the second part of this
                   chapter dealing with exergy analysis. The specific Gibbs function g, introduced in Sec. 11.3, is

                   g h Ts                                                                          (13.27)

Gibbs function of     The procedure followed in setting a datum for the Gibbs function closely parallels that used
formation          in defining the enthalpy of formation: To each stable element at the standard state is assigned
                   a zero value of the Gibbs function. The Gibbs function of formation of a compound equals
                   the change in the Gibbs function for the reaction in which the compound is formed from its
                   elements, the compound and the elements all being at Tref and pref. Table A-25 gives the Gibbs
                   function of formation, g°f , at 25C and 1 atm for selected substances.

                      The Gibbs function at a state other than the standard state is found by adding to the Gibbs
                   function of formation the change in the specific Gibbs function ˘g between the standard
                   state and the state of interest

                   g1T, p2  g °f  3 g1T, p2  g1Tref, pref2 4  g °f  ˘g                             (13.28)

                   With Eq. 13.27, ˘g can be written as

                                      ˘g  3 h1T, p2  h1Tref, pref2 4  3 T s 1T, p2  Tref s 1Tref, pref2 4

                   The Gibbs function of component i in an ideal gas mixture is evaluated at the partial pres-
                   sure of component i and the mixture temperature.

                      The procedure for determining the Gibbs function of formation is illustrated in the next
                   example.

E X A M P L E 1 3 . 1 1 Determining the Gibbs Function of Formation

Determine the Gibbs function of formation of methane at the standard state, 25C and 1 atm, in kJ/kmol, and compare with
the value given in Table A-25.

SOLUTION

Known: The compound is methane.
Find: Determine the Gibbs function of formation at the standard state, in kJ/kmol, and compare with the Table A-25 value.
Assumptions: In the formation of methane from carbon and hydrogen (H2), the carbon and hydrogen are each initially at
25C and 1 atm. The methane formed is also at 25C and 1 atm.
Analysis: Methane is formed from carbon and hydrogen according to C  2H2 S CH4. The change in the Gibbs function
for this reaction is

                                           gP  gR  1h  T s2CH4  1h  T s2C  21h  T s2H2
                                                       1hCH4  hC  2hH22  T 1sCH4  sC  2sH22

where gP and gR denote, respectively, the Gibbs functions of the reactants and products, each per kmol of methane.
                                                                                                             13.6 Introducing Chemical Exergy 655

    In the present case, all substances are at the same temperature and pressure, 25C and 1 atm, which correspond to the stan-
dard reference state values. At the standard reference state, the enthalpies and Gibbs functions for carbon and hydrogen are
zero by definition. Thus, in the above equation gR  hC  hH2  0. Also, gP  1g°f2CH4, giving

                                                   1g°f2CH4  1h°f2CH4  Tref 1s°CH4  s°C  2 s°H22
where the superscript  denotes properties at Tref, pref. With enthalpy of formation and absolute entropy data from Table A-25

                           1g°f2CH4  74,850  298.15 3 186.16  5.74  21130.572 4  50,783 kJ/kmol
The slight difference between the calculated value for the Gibbs function of formation of methane and the value from Table A-25
can be attributed to round-off.

   CHEMICAL EXERGY1

The objective of this part of the chapter is to extend the exergy concept introduced in Chap. 7
by considering the role of chemical composition. To distinguish the current considerations
from those introduced previously, let the system be a specified amount of a hydrocarbon fuel
CaHb at temperature T0 and pressure p0 and let the exergy reference environment consist of
a gas phase at T0, p0 involving nitrogen, oxygen, water vapor, and carbon dioxide. Since the
system is in thermal and mechanical equilibrium with the environment, the value of exergy as
defined in Sec. 7.2 would be zero. More precisely, we should say that the thermomechanical
contribution to the exergy magnitude has a value of zero, for a chemical contribution related
to composition can be defined that has a nonzero value. This aspect of the exergy concept is
the subject of the present section.

13.6 Introducing Chemical Exergy                                                                 thermomechanical
                                                                                                 exergy
Exergy is introduced in Chap. 7 through study of a combined system consisting of a system
of interest and an exergy reference environment. The object of the development of Sec. 7.2.3     chemical exergy
is an expression for the maximum theoretical work obtainable from the combined system
as the system comes into thermal and mechanical equilibrium with the environment. The
thermomechanical exergy is this value for work. We begin the present section by studying
a combined system formed by an environment and an amount of a hydrocarbon fuel at T0,
p0. The object is to evaluate the work obtainable by allowing the fuel to react with oxygen
from the environment to produce the environmental components carbon dioxide and water,
each at its respective state in the environment. The chemical exergy is, by definition, the
maximum theoretical work that could be developed by the combined system. The sum of the
thermomechanical and chemical exergies is the total exergy associated with a given system
at a specified state, relative to a specified exergy reference environment.

CHEMICAL EXERGY OF A HYDROCARBON: CaHb

Consider a combined system formed by an environment and an amount of a hydrocarbon
fuel, CaHb. To help us visualize how work might be obtained through the reaction of the fuel
with environmental components, a fuel cell operating at steady state is included in the
combined system, as shown in Fig. 13.4. Referring to this figure, fuel enters the cell at tem-
perature T0 and pressure p0. At another location, oxygen enters from the environment.

1Study of Chap. 7 is a prerequisite for this part of the chapter.
656 Chapter 13 Reacting Mixtures and Combustion                                               Boundary of
                                                                            Work            combined system

CaHb                            Boundary of the cell
  at                                 CO2 at T0, yCe O2 p0

T0, p0

O2 at T0, yOe 2p0                                                                 H2O at T0, yHe 2Op0
                       T0

          Heat transfer
        with environment

        Environment at T0, p0

                                                                                                                   Figure 13.4 Illustration used to intro-
                                                                                                                  duce the fuel chemical exergy concept.

Assuming the environment consists of an ideal gas mixture, the oxygen would enter at its
condition within the environment: temperature T0 and partial pressure yeO2 p0, where yOe 2 is the
mole fraction of the oxygen in the exergy reference environment. The fuel and oxygen react

completely within the cell to produce carbon dioxide and water vapor, which exit in sepa-

rate streams at their conditions within the environment: temperature T0 and the partial pres-
sures yeCO2 p0 and yHe 2Op0, respectively. The reaction is given by

                                                                                                    b                         b
                                CaHb                                                        aa       b  O2        aCO2        2 H2O                          (13.29)
                                                                                                    4        S

For steady-state operation, the energy rate balance for a control volume enclosing the fuel

cell reduces to give

                              ##

                           Wcv                                                    Qcv       hF      aa      bb    hO2    ahCO2      b    hH2O                (13.30)
                            #                                                      #                        4                       2
                           nF                                                     nF

Kinetic and potential energy effects are regarded as negligible. S# ince the fuel cell is at steady
state, its volume does not change with time, so no portion of Wcv is required to displace the
environment. Thus, Eq. 13.30 gives the work developed by the combined system of system

plus environment. Heat transfer is assumed to occur with the environment only at tempera-

ture T0. An entropy rate balance for the control volume enclosing the fuel cell takes the form
                              Q# cvn# F
        0                                                                               sF      aa      bb   sO2       asCO2     b  sH2O        #            (13.31)
                                T0                                                                      4                        2
                                                                                                                                               scv
                                                                                                                                                #
                                                                                                                                               nF

Eliminating the heat transfer rate between Eqs. 13.30 and 13.31 results in

                           #

                      Wcv                                                         c hF      aa      bb  hO2       ahCO2       b  hH2O d
                       #                                                                            4                         2
                      nF

                                                                                                         bb                         b                   #
                                                                                                         4                          2
                                                                                  T0 c sF         aa         sO2       asCO2           sH2O d       T0  scv  (13.32)
                                                                                                                                                         #
                                                                                                                                                        nF
                                                                                                                       13.6 Introducing Chemical Exergy 657

   In Eq. 13.32, the specific enthalpy and entropy of the fuel are evaluated at T0 and p0.
The values of the specific enthalpies in the first underlined term can be determined know-

ing only the temperature T0. The specific entropies in the second underlined term can be
determined knowing the temperature, pressure, and composition of the environment. Ac-

cordingly, once the environment is specified, all enthalpy and entropy terms of Eq. 13.32

can be regarded as known and independent of the nature of the processes occurring within
                                              #
the  control  volume.  The   term      T0scv           depends                 explicity     on    the  nature     of  such  processes,
                                                                                    #
however. In accordance with the second law, T0scv is positive whenever internal irre-

versibilities are present, vanishes in the limiting case of no irreversibilities, and is never

negative. The maximum theoretical value for the work developed is obtained when no
                                                 #

irreversibilities are present. Setting T0scv to zero in Eq. 13.32, the following expression
for the chemical exergy results

                       e ch    c hF        aa                bb          hO2         ahCO2      b  hH2O d
                                                             4                                  2

                                   T0 c sF             aa                b                           b     sH2O d
                                                                           b     sO2      asCO2                              (13.33)
                                                                         4                           2

The superscript ch is used to distinguish this contribution to the exergy magnitude from the
thermomechanical exergy introduced in Chap. 7.

WORKING EQUATIONS. For computational convenience, the chemical exergy given by
Eq. 13.33 can be written as Eq. 13.35 by replacing the specific entropy terms for O2, CO2,
and H2O using the following expression obtained by reduction of Eq. 6.21b

                                   si 1T0, yiep02  si 1T0, p02  R ln yei                                                     (13.34)

The first term on the right is the absolute entropy at T0 and p0, and yie is the mole fraction of
component i in the environment.

Applying Eq. 13.34, Eq. 13.33 becomes

              e ch     c hF        aa            b                         ahCO2          b  hH2O1g2 d  1T0, p02
                                                 4 b hO2                                  2

                                                             b                                  b
                        T0 c sF  aa  4 b sO2  asCO2  2 sH2O1g2 d 1T0, p02                                                    (13.35) 

                             RT0   ln  c   1    1yOe 22ab4                       d
                                              yeCO22a1yHe 2O2b2

The specific enthalpy terms are determined using the enthalpies of formation for the re-
spective substances. The specific entropies appearing in the equation are absolute entropies
determined as described in Sec. 13.5. The logarithmic term normally contributes only a few
percent to the chemical exergy magnitude.

   Equation 13.35 can be expressed alternatively in terms of the Gibbs functions of the re-
spective substances as

              e ch           c gF      aa              b                       agCO2         b  gH2O1g2 d  1T0, p02
                                                       4 b gO2                               2

                                                       1  y  e     2  a    b4                                                (13.36) 
                                                             O2
                               RT0     ln  c                                         d
                                                 1  y  e     2  a  1  y  e    2  b2
                                                       CO2               H2O
658 Chapter 13 Reacting Mixtures and Combustion

                          The specific Gibbs functions are evaluated at the temperature T0 and pressure p0 of the en-
                          vironment. These terms can be determined with Eq. 13.28 as

                                                       g 1T0, p02  g °f  3 g 1T0, p02  g 1Tref, pref2 4                                        (13.37)

                          where  g  o  is  the  Gibbs  function    of      formation.   For      the  special  case  where        T0  and  p0  are  the
                                    f

                          same as Tref and pref, respectively, the second term on the right of Eq. 13.37 vanishes and the

                          specific Gibbs function is just the Gibbs function of formation. Finally, note that the under-

                          lined term of Eq. 13.36 can be written more compactly as ˘G: the negative of the change

                          in Gibbs function for the reaction, Eq. 13.29, regarding each substance as separate at tem-

                          perature T0 and pressure p0.

                          CHEMICAL EXERGY OF OTHER SUBSTANCES

                          The method introduced above for evaluating the chemical exergy of pure hydrocarbons
                          also can be used in principle for substances other than hydrocarbons: The chemical exergy
                          is the maximum theoretical work that could be developed by a fuel cell into which a sub-
                          stance of interest enters at T0, p0 and reacts completely with environmental components to
                          produce environmental components. All environmental components involved enter and exit
                          the cell at their conditions within the environment. By describing the environment appro-
                          priately, this method can be applied to all substances of practical interest.2 In the follow-
                          ing discussion, we limit consideration to the compounds CO, H2O, N2, O2, and CO2, for
                          these participate in the elementary combustion reactions serving as the focus of the pres-
                          ent chapter. Of these five compounds, only carbon monoxide is not among the substances
                          present in the environment we have been considering. Let us take up the compounds in the
                          order listed.

                           Paralleling the development of Eq. 13.36 for the case of pure carbon monoxide, at

                          T0,    p0,   the  reaction   within      the  cell    is  CO    1     O2  S   CO2,   and   the  chemical    exergy   is
                                                                                          2

                          given by

                                                e  ch       3 gCO       1  gO2      gCO2 4 1T0,  p02    RT0   ln  c  1yeO2212  d               (13.38)
                                                   CO                   2                                             yeCO2

H2O (l)       H2O(g)         If carbon monoxide is not pure but a component of an ideal gas mixture at T0, p0, each
   at             at         component i of the mixture would enter the cell at temperature T0 and the respective
                             partial pressure yi p0. The contribution of carbon monoxide to the chemical exergy of
 T0, p0     T0, yHe 2Op0     the mixture, per mole of CO, is then given by Eq. 13.38 with the mole fraction of car-

         T0                  bon monoxide in the mixture, yCO, appearing in the numerator of the logarithmic term

                            that then reads  ln 3 yCO1yOe 2212 yCe O2 4 . This consideration is important when evaluating the

                             exergy of combustion products involving carbon monoxide.

                           Next, consider the case of pure water at T0, p0. Water is present as a vapor within the
                             environment under present consideration but normally is a liquid when at T0, p0. Thus,
                             water would enter the cell as a liquid at T0, p0 and exit as a vapor at T0, y eH2Op0, with no
                             cell reaction occurring. The chemical exergy is

                                                   e   ch     3 gH2O1l2         gH2O1g2 4 1T0,   p02    RT0  ln      1                         (13.39)
                                                       H2O                                                        a yHe 2O b

                          2For further discussion see M. J. Moran, Availability Analysis: A Guide to Efficient Energy Use, ASME Press,
                          New York, 1989, pp. 169­170.
                                                                                                                 13.7 Standard Chemical Exergy 659

 Next, consider N2, O2, CO2, each pure at T0, p0. Nitrogen, oxygen, and carbon dioxide                                           N2              N2
                                                                                                                                                  at
are present within the environment, and normally are gases when at T0, p0. For each                                                at        T0, yeN2p0
case, the gas would enter the cell at T0, p0 and exit at T0, yep0, where ye is the mole                                          T0, p0
                                                                                                                                         T0
fraction of N2, O2, or CO2 in the environment, as appropriate. No cell reaction would

occur. The chemical exergy is given simply by a logarithmic term of the form

                                         e ch          RT0      ln  a  1   b                                           (13.40)
                                                                       ye

 Finally, for an ideal gas mixture at T0, p0 consisting only of substances present as gases
   in the environment, the chemical exergy is obtained by summing the contributions of
   each of the components. The result, per mole of mixture, is

                                       e ch       RT0      a    yi  ln  a  yi   b                                      (13.41a)
                                                                           yie
                                                             i

where    yi  and  y  e  denote,  respectively,    the  mole         fraction       of  component    i  in  the   mixture    at
                     i

T0,  p0  and  in  the   environment.   Expressing          the  logarithmic            term  as  1  ln11y  e  2    ln  yi2  and
                                                                                                           i

introducing Eq. 13.40 for each gas, Eq. 13.41a can be written alternatively as

                                 e ch    a      yi  e  ch       RT0     a     yi   ln  yi                              (13.41b)
                                                       i

                                             i                          i

   The development of Eqs. 13.38 through 13.41 is left as an exercise. Subsequent examples
and end-of-chapter problems illustrate their use.

13.7 Standard Chemical Exergy                                                                                                    standard chemical exergy

The exergy reference environments used thus far to calculate exergy values are adequate for
a wide range of practical applications, including combustion. However, for many cases of
interest the environment must be extended to include other substances. In applications in-
volving coal, for example, sulfur dioxide or some other sulfur-bearing compound would gen-
erally appear among the environmental components. Furthermore, once the environment is
determined, a series of calculations would be required to obtain exergy values for the sub-
stances of interest. These complexities can be sidestepped by using a table of standard
chemical exergies.

    Standard chemical exergy values are based on a standard exergy reference environment
exhibiting standard values of the environmental temperature T0 and pressure p0 such as
298.15 K and 1 atm, respectively. The exergy reference environment also consists of a set
of reference substances with standard concentrations reflecting as closely as possible
the chemical makeup of the natural environment. To exclude the possibility of develop-
ing work from interactions among parts of the environment, these reference substances must
be in equilibrium mutually.

    The reference substances generally fall into three groups: gaseous components of the
atmosphere, solid substances from the Earth's crust, and ionic and nonionic substances
from the oceans. A common feature of standard exergy reference environments is a gas
phase, intended to represent air, that includes N2, O2, CO2, H2O(g), and other gases. The
660 Chapter 13 Reacting Mixtures and Combustion

ith gas present in this gas phase is assumed to be at temperature T0 and the partial pressure

pei    y   e  p0.
           i

     Two alternative standard exergy reference environments are commonly used, called here

Model I and Model II. For each of these models, Table A-26 gives values of the standard

chemical exergy for several substances, in units of kJ/kmol, together with a brief description

of the underlying rationale. The methods employed to determine the tabulated standard chem-

ical exergy values are detailed in the references accompanying the tables. Only one of the

two models should be used in a particular analysis.

     The use of a table of standard chemical exergies often simplifies the application of ex-

ergy principles. However, the term "standard" is somewhat misleading, for there is no one

specification of the environment that suffices for all applications. Still, chemical exergies

calculated relative to alternative specifications of the environment are generally in good

agreement. For a broad range of engineering applications, the convenience of using stan-

dard values generally outweighs the slight lack of accuracy that might result. In particular,

the effect of slight variations in the values of T0 and p0 about their standard values can be
neglected.

STANDARD CHEMICAL EXERGY OF A HYDROCARBON: CaHb

In principle, the standard chemical exergy of a substance not present in the environment can
be evaluated by considering an idealized reaction of the substance involving other substances
for which the chemical exergies are known. To illustrate this for the case of a pure hydro-
carbon fuel CaHb at T0, p0, refer to the control volume at steady state shown in Fig. 13.5
where the fuel reacts with oxygen to form carbon dioxide and liquid water according to
Eq. 13.29. All substances are assumed to enter and exit at T0, p0 and heat transfer occurs only
at temperature T0.

   Assuming no irreversibilities, an exergy rate balance reads

                                                               0#                 #

                   0     a       c1                      T0 d  a   Qj  b       a  Wcv  b  int    e   ch    aa    bb   e   ch
                                                         Tj        #               #      rev        F           4        O2
                           j                                       nF             nF

                             ae                  ch         abb    e ch           #0
                                                 CO2         2        H2O 1l2     Ed

where, as before, the subscript F denotes the fuel. Solving for the fuel chemical exergy, we

obtain

                                                    #

                      e  ch                      a  Wcv  b         ae  ch         abb     e ch           aa    bb  e  ch      (13.42)
                         F                           #                 CO2         2         H2O1l2            2      O2
                                                    nF irnetv

                                                               W· cv

CaHb                                                                                             CO2
at T0, p0                                                                                        at T0, p0

O2                                                                                               H2O (l)        Figure 13.5 Reactor
at T0, p0                                                                                        at T0, p0     used to introduce the stan-
                                                                                                               dard chemical exergy of
                             T0                             Q· cv                                              CaHb.
                                                                                                             13.7 Standard Chemical Exergy 661

Paralleling the development of Eq. 13.32 for the case of Fig. 13.5, we also have

           #

       a  Wcv  b  int    c hF        aa        bb      hO2         ahCO2    b    hH2O1l2 d 1T0, p02
           #      rev                          4                            2
          nF

                                               aa      b                            b
                             T0 c sF                    b      sO2        asCO2         sH2O1l2 d 1T0,  p02      (13.43)
                                                       4                            2

   The underlined term in Eq. 13.43 is recognized from Sec. 13.2 as the molar higher heat-
ing value HHV (T0, p0). Introducing Eq. 13.43 into Eq. 13.42, we have

e  ch    HHV1T0,       p02        T0  c sF         aa          bb  sO2      asCO2       b  sH2O1l2 d  1T0,  p02
   F                                                           4                        2

              ae  ch     a  b  b  e  ch   1l2      aa          bb  e  ch                                         (13.44a) 
                  CO2       2        H2O                       4      O2

Equations 13.42 and 13.43 can be expressed alternatively in terms of molar Gibbs functions
as follows

           e  ch       c gF  aa                bb  gO2  agCO2               b
              F                                4                            2 gH2O1l2 d 1T0, p02

                         ae  ch        abb         e ch            aa       bb   e  ch                           (13.44b) 
                             CO2        2             H2O 1l2               4       O2

   With Eqs. 13.44, the standard chemical exergy of the hydrocarbon CaHb can be calcu-
lated using the standard chemical exergies of O2, CO2, and H2O(l), together with selected
property data: the higher heating value and absolute entropies, or Gibbs functions.  for
example. . . consider the case of methane, CH4, and T0  298.15 K (25C), p0  1 atm.
For this application we can use Gibbs function data directly from Table A-25, and standard
chemical exergies for CO2, H2O(l), and O2 from Table A-26 (Model II), since each source
corresponds to 298 K, 1 atm. With a  1, b  4, Eq. 13.44b gives 831,680 kJ/kmol. This
agrees with the value listed for methane in Table A-26 for Model II. 

   We conclude the present discussion by noting special aspects of Eqs. 13.44:

 First, Eq. 13.44a requires the higher heating value and the absolute entropy of the fuel.
   When data from property compilations are lacking, as in the cases of coal, char, and
   fuel oil, the approach of Eq. 13.44a can be invoked using a measured or estimated
   heating value and an estimated value of the fuel absolute entropy determined with
   procedures discussed in the literature.3

 Next, note that the first term of Eq. 13.44b involving the Gibbs functions has the same
   form as the first term of Eq. 13.36, except here liquid water appears. Also, the first term
   of Eq. 13.44b can be written more compactly as ˘G: the negative of the change in
   Gibbs function for the reaction.

 Finally, note that only the underlined terms of Eqs. 13.44 require chemical exergy data
   relative to the model selected for the exergy reference environment.

   In Example 13.12 we compare the use of Eq. 13.36 and Eq. 13.44b for evaluating the
chemical exergy of a pure hydrocarbon fuel.

3See, for example, A. Bejan, G. Tsatsaronis, and M. J. Moran, Thermal Design and Optimization,Wiley,
New York, 1996, Sec. 3.4.3.
662 Chapter 13 Reacting Mixtures and Combustion

  E X A M P L E 1 3 . 1 2 Evaluating the Chemical Exergy of Octane

  Determine the chemical exergy of liquid octane at 25C, 1 atm, in kJ/kg. (a) Using Eq. 13.36, evaluate the chemical exergy
  for an environment consisting of a gas phase at 25C, 1 atm obeying the ideal gas model with the following composition on
  a molar basis: N2, 75.67%; O2, 20.35%; H2O, 3.12%; CO2, 0.03%; other, 0.83%. (b) Evaluate the chemical exergy using
  Eq. 13.44b and standard chemical exergies from Table A-26 (Model II).

  SOLUTION

  Known: The fuel is liquid octane.
  Find: Determine the chemical exergy (a) using Eq. 13.36 relative to an environment consisting of a gas phase at 25C, 1 atm
  with a specified composition, (b) using Eq. 13.44b and standard chemical exergies.

  Schematic and Given Data:

                             ech     =   ·    n· F)max
                                        (Wcv

                                                          Boundary of
                                                        combined system

                  C8H18                       Boundary of the cell              Assumptions: As shown in Fig. E13.12, the environment for
                     at                            CO2 at T0, yCe O2 p0         part (a) consists of an ideal gas mixture with the molar analysis:
                                                                                N2, 75.67%; O2, 20.35%; H2O, 3.12%; CO2, 0.03%; other, 0.83%.
                  T0, p0                                                        For part (b), Model II of Table A-26 applies.



  O2 at T0, yOe 2p0                           H2O at T0, yHe 2Op0
   Environment:

  T0 = 25°C T0
  p0 = 1 atm
  yHe 2yOCeyy(ONOeeg222)
                          =  0.7567    Heat transfer
                          =  0.2035  with environment
                          =  0.0312
                          =  0.0003

                                                                                 Figure E13.12

  Analysis: Complete combustion of liquid octane with O2 is described by

                                                        C8H181l2  12.5O2 S 8CO2  9H2O

  (a) For this reaction equation, Eq. 13.36 takes the form

                                                        e ch  3 gC8H181l2  12.5 gO2  8 gCO2  9 gH2O1g2 4 1T0, p02

                                                          RT0            ln  c      1yeO2212.5         d
                                                                                1yCe O2281yHe 2O1g229

      Since T0  Tref and p0  pref, the required specific Gibbs functions are just the Gibbs functions of formation from Table
  A-25. With the given composition of the environment and data from Table A-25, the above equation gives

                                              e ch  3 6610  12.5102  81394,3802  91228,5902 4

                                                                                      10.2035212.5
                                                         8.3141298.152 ln c 10.00032810.031229 d

                                                         5,218,960  188,883  5,407,843 kJ/kmol
                                                                                  13.7 Standard Chemical Exergy 663

  Dividing by the molecular weight, the chemical exergy is obtained on a unit mass basis

    ech  5,407,843  47,346 kJ/kg
             114 .22

  (b) Using coefficients from the reaction equation above, Eq. 13.44b reads

  e ch  3 gC8H181l2  12.5 gO2  8 gCO2  9 gH2O1l2 4 1T0, p02

    8 eCchO2    9  e ch        12.5 eOch2
                     H2O1l2

  With data from Table A-25 and Model II of Table A-26, the above equation gives

  e ch  3 6610  12.5102  81394,3802  91237,1802 4
           8119,8702  919002  12.5139702

       5,296,270  117,435  5,413,705 kJ/kmol

  As expected, this agrees closely with the value listed for octane in Table A-26 (Model II). Dividing by the molecular weight,
  the chemical exergy is obtained on a unit mass basis

    ech  5,413,705  47,397 kJ/kg
             114.22

  The chemical exergies determined with the two approaches used in parts (a) and (b) closely agree.

   A molar analysis of the environment of part (a) on a dry basis reads, O2: 21%, N2, CO2 and the other dry components:

      79%. This is consistent with the dry air analysis used throughout the chapter. The water vapor present in the assumed en-
      vironment corresponds to the amount of vapor that would be present were the gas phase saturated with water at the spec-
      ified temperature and pressure.

   The value of the logarithmic term of Eq. 13.36 depends on the composition of the environment. In the present case, this

      term contributes about 3% to the magnitude of the chemical exergy. The contribution of the logarithmic term is usually
      small. In such instances, a satisfactory approximation to the chemical exergy can be obtained by omitting the term.

   The terms of Eqs. 13.36 and 13.44b involving the Gibbs functions have the same form, except gH2O appears in Eq. 13.36

      for water vapor and in Eq. 13.44b for liquid water.

STANDARD CHEMICAL EXERGY OF OTHER SUBSTANCES

By paralleling the development given above for hydrocarbon fuels leading to Eq. 13.44b, we
can in principle determine the standard chemical exergy of any substance not present in the
environment. With such a substance playing the role of the fuel in the previous development,
we consider a reaction of the substance involving other substances for which the standard
chemical exergies are known, and write

  e ch  ˘G  a ne ch  a ne ch                                                              (13.45) 

    P              R

where G is the change in Gibbs function for the reaction, regarding each substance as sep-
arate at temperature T0 and pressure p0. The underlined term corresponds to the underlined
term of Eq. 13.44b and is evaluated using the known standard chemical exergies, together
with the n's giving the moles of these reactants and products per mole of the substance whose
chemical exergy is being evaluated.

    for example. . . consider the case of ammonia, NH3, and T0  298.15 K (25C),
p0  1 atm. Letting NH3 play the role of the hydrocarbon in the development leading to
664 Chapter 13 Reacting Mixtures and Combustion

              Eq. 13.44b, we can consider any reaction of NH3 involving other substances for which the
              standard chemical exergies are known. For the reaction

                                                        NH3  34O2 S 21N2  23H2O

              Eq. 13.45 takes the form

                                         e    ch       3 gNH3         3  gO2    1  gN2     3  gH2O1l2  4  1T0,  p02
                                              NH3                     4         2          2

                                                         1  e  ch        e 3 ch         3  e  ch
                                                         2     N2                       4     O2
                                                                         2 H2O1l2

              Using Gibbs function data from Table A-25, and standard chemical exergies for O2, N2, and

              H2O(l)  from  Table    A-26     (Model     II),  e   ch         337,910      kJ/kmol.       This   agrees  closely  with  the
                                                                   NH3

              value for ammonia listed in Table A-26 for Model II. 

              Finally, note that Eq. 13.41b is valid for mixtures containing gases other than those pres-

              ent in the reference environment, for example gaseous fuels. This equation also can be applied

              to mixtures (and solutions) that do not adhere to the ideal gas model. In all such applica-

              tions,  the  terms  e  ch  are  selected   from      a  table   of   standard        chemical     exergies.
                                     i

              13.8 Exergy Summary

              The exergy associated with a specified state of a system is the sum of two contributions: the
              thermomechanical contribution introduced in Chap. 7 and the chemical contribution intro-
              duced in this chapter. On a unit mass basis, the total exergy is

total exergy                      e      1u       u02    p01v            v02    T01s          s02    V2         gz     ech        (13.46)
                                                                                                     2

              where the underlined term is the thermomechanical contribution (Eq. 7.9) and ech is the chem-
              ical contribution evaluated as in Sec. 13.6 or 13.7. Similarly, the specific flow exergy asso-
              ciated with a specified state is the sum

                                              ef    h    h0           T01s      s02        V2       gz      ech                   (13.47)
                                                                                           2

              where the underlined term is the thermomechanical contribution (Eq. 7.20) and ech is the
              chemical contribution.

                 When evaluating the thermomechanical contributions, we can think of bringing the system
              without change in composition from the specified state to T0, p0, the condition where the sys-
              tem is in thermal and mechanical equilibrium with the environment. Depending on the nature
              of the system, this may be a hypothetical condition.

                 When a difference in exergy or flow exergy between states of the same composition is
              evaluated, the chemical contribution cancels, leaving just the difference in the thermome-
              chanical contributions. For such a calculation, it is unnecessary to evaluate the chemical ex-
              ergy explicitly. However, for many evaluations it is necessary to account explicitly for the
              chemical exergy contribution. This is brought out in subsequent examples.

              ILLUSTRATIONS

              The following two examples illustrate the exergy principles considered above. In Exam-
              ple 13.13, Eq. 13.47 is applied to evaluate the specific flow exergy of a steam leak.
                                                                                                                    13.8 Exergy Summary 665

E X A M P L E 1 3 . 1 3 Evaluating the Flow Exergy of a Steam Leak

Steam at 5 bar, 240C leaks from a line in a vapor power plant. Evaluate the flow exergy of the steam, in kJ/kg, relative to
an environment at 25C, 1 atm in which the mole fraction of water vapor is yHe 2O  0.0303.

SOLUTION
Known: Water vapor at a known state is specified. The environment is also described.
Find: Determine the flow exergy of the water vapor, in kJ/kg.
Assumptions:
1. The environment consists of a gas phase that obeys the ideal gas model. The mole fraction of water vapor in the environ-
ment is 0.0303.
2. Neglect the effects of motion and gravity.
Analysis: With assumption 2, the specific flow exergy is given by Eq. 13.47 as

                                                       ef  1h  h02  T01s  s02  ech

    The underlined term is the thermomechanical contribution to the flow exergy, evaluated as in Chap. 7. With data from the
steam tables, and noting that water is a liquid at T0, p0

                                   h  h0  T01s  s02  12939.9  104.92  29817.2307  0.36742
                                                              789.7 kJ/kg

where h0 and s0 are approximated as the saturated liquid values at T0.
    The chemical exergy contribution to the flow exergy relative to the specified environment is evaluated using Eq. 13.39.

With data from Table A-25

                                    ech    1   e  3 gH2O1l2    gH2O1g2 4 1T0,  p02    RT0  ln     1
                                           M                                                   a yeH2O b f

                                          1 e 3237,180  1228,5902 4  18.314212982 ln a 1 b f
                                           18                                                               0.0303

                                          73.1 kJ/kmol  4.1 kJ/kg
                                             18 kg/kmol

Adding the thermomechanical and chemical contributions, the flow exergy of steam at the specified state is

                                                        ef  789.7  4.1  793.8 kJ/kg
In this case, the chemical exergy contributes less than 1% to the total flow exergy magnitude.

In Example 13.14, we evaluate the flow exergy of combustion products.

E X A M P L E 1 3 . 1 4 Evaluating the Flow Exergy of Combustion Products

Methane gas enters a reactor and burns completely with 140% theoretical air. Combustion products exit as a mixture at tem-

perature T and a pressure of 1 atm. For T  480 and 1560 K, evaluate the flow exergy of the combustion products, in kJ per

kmol of fuel. Perform calculations relative to an environment consisting of an ideal gas mixture at 25C, 1 atm with the molar

analysis,  y  e     0.7567,  y  e     0.2035,     y  e       0.0303,  y  e       0.0003.
              N2                O2                   H2O                 CO2
666 Chapter 13 Reacting Mixtures and Combustion

  SOLUTION

  Known: Methane gas reacts completely with 140% of the theoretical amount of air. Combustion products exit the reactor at
  1 atm and a specified temperature. The environment is also specified.

  Find: Determine the flow exergy of the combustion products, in Btu per lbmol of fuel, for each of two given temperatures.

  Assumptions:

  1. The combustion products are modeled as an ideal gas mixture at all states considered.
  2. Neglect the effects of motion and gravity.

  Analysis: For 140% theoretical air, the reaction equation for complete combustion of methane is

                      CH4  2.81O2  3.76N22 S CO2  2H2O  10.53N2  0.8O2

         The flow exergy is given by Eq. 13.47, which involves chemical and thermomechanical contributions. Since the com-

 bustion products form an ideal gas mixture when at T0, p0 (assumption 1) and each component is present within the en-

     vironment, the chemical exergy contribution, per mole of fuel, is obtained from the following expression patterned after

     Eq. 13.41a

                e ch    RT0 c  1  ln  a  yCO2    b    2  ln  a  yH2O    b    10.53  ln  a  yN2    b    0.8  ln  a  yO2    b  d

                                         y  e                   y  e                       y  e                    y  e
                                            CO2                    H2O                        N2                      O2

  From the reaction equation, the mole fractions of the components of the products are yCO2  0.0698, yH2O  0.1396, yN2 
  0.7348, yO2  0.0558. Substituting these values together with the respective environmental mole fractions, we obtain
  e ch  17,750 kJ per kmol of fuel.

      Applying ideal gas mixture principles, the thermomechanical contribution to the flow exergy, per mole of fuel, is

                  h  h0  T01s  s02  3 h1T 2  h1T02  T01s°1T 2  s°1T02  R  ln1yCO2 p yCO2 p02 2 4 CO2
                                         2 3 h1T 2  h1T02  T01s°1T 2  s°1T02  R  ln1yH2O p yH2O p02 2 4 H2O
                                         10.53 3 h1T 2  h1T02  T01s°1T 2  s°1T02  R  ln1yN2 p yN2 p02 2 4 N2
                                         0.8 3 h1T 2  h1T02  T01s°1T 2  s°1T02  R ln1yO2 pyO2 p02 2 4 O2

  Since p  p0, each of the logarithm terms drop out, and with h and s° data at T0 from Table A-23, the thermomechanical
  contribution reads

                                 h  h0  T01s  s02  3 h1T 2  9364  2981s°1T 2  213.6852 4 CO2
                                                               2 3 h1T 2  9904  2981s°1T 2  188.722 4 H2O
                                                               10.53 3 h1T 2  8669  2981s°1T 2  191.5022 4 N2
                                                               0.8 3 h1T 2  8682  2981s°1T 2  205.0332 4 O2

  Then, with h and s° from Table A-23 at T  480 and 1560K, respectively, the following results are obtained

                      T  480 K: h  h0  T01s  s02  17,712 kJ per kmol of fuel
                      T  1560 K: h  h0  T01s  s02  390, 853 kJ per kmol of fuel

  Adding the two contributions, the flow exergy of the combustion products at each of the specified states is

                                  T  480 K: ef  35,462 kJ per kmol of fuel

                                  T  1560 K: ef  408,603 kJ per kmol of fuel

   This is a hypothetical state for the combustion products because condensation of some of the water vapor present would

      occur were the products brought to T0, p0. An exergy evaluation explicitly taking such condensation into account is con-
      sidered in Bejan, Tsatsaronis and Moran, Thermal Design and Optimization, p. 129, p. 138.

   The chemical contribution to the flow exergy is relatively unimportant in the higher-temperature case, amounting only

      to about 4% of the flow exergy. Chemical exergy accounts for about half of the exergy in the lower-temperature case,
      however.
                                                                            13.9 Exergetic (Second Law) Efficiencies of Reacting Systems 667

13.9 Exergetic (Second Law) Efficiencies
           of Reacting Systems

Devices designed to do work by utilization of a combustion process, such as vapor and gas
power plants and internal combustion engines, invariably have irreversibilities and losses as-
sociated with their operation. Accordingly, actual devices produce work equal to only a frac-
tion of the maximum theoretical value that might be obtained in idealized circumstances. The
vapor power plant exergy analysis of Sec. 8.6 and the combined cycle exergy analysis of
Example 9.13 provide illustrations.

    The performance of devices intended to do work can be evaluated as the ratio of the actual
work developed to the maximum theoretical work. This ratio is a type of exergetic (second law)
efficiency. The relatively low exergetic efficiency exhibited by many common power-producing
devices suggests that thermodynamically more thrifty ways of utilizing the fuel to develop power
might be possible. However, efforts in this direction must be tempered by the economic imper-
atives that govern the practical application of all devices. The trade-off between fuel savings and
the additional costs required to achieve those savings must be carefully weighed.

    The fuel cell provides an illustration of a relatively fuel-efficient device. We noted previ-
ously (Sec. 13.4) that the chemical reactions in fuel cells are more controlled than the rapidly
occurring, highly irreversible combustion reactions taking place in conventional power-
producing devices. In principle, fuel cells can achieve greater exergetic efficiencies than many
such devices.

    The example to follow illustrates the evaluation of an exergetic efficiency for an internal
combustion engine.

    E X A M P L E 1 3 . 1 5 Exergetic Efficiency of an Internal Combustion Engine

    Devise and evaluate an exergetic efficiency for the internal combustion engine of Example 13.4. For the fuel, use the chemi-
    cal exergy value determined in Example 13.12(a).

    SOLUTION

    Known: Liquid octane and the theoretical amount of air enter an internal combustion engine operating at steady state in sep-
    arate streams at 25C, 1 atm, and burn completely. The combustion products exit at 890 K. The power developed by the en-
    gine is 37 kW, and the fuel mass flow rate is 1.8  103 kg/s.

    Find: Devise and evaluate an exergetic efficiency for the engine using the fuel chemical exergy value determined in Exam-
    ple 13.12(a).

    Schematic and Given Data: See Fig. E13.4.

    Assumptions:

    1. See the assumptions listed in the solution to Example 13.4.
    2. The environment is the same as used in Example 13.12(a).
    3. The combustion air enters at the condition of the environment.
    4. Kinetic and potential energy effects are negligible.

    Analysis: An exergy balance can be used in formulating an exergetic efficiency for the engine: At steady state, the rate at
    which exergy enters the engine equals the rate at which exergy exits plus the rate at which exergy is destroyed within the en-
    gine. As the combustion air enters at the condition of the environment, and thus with zero exergy, exergy enters the engine
    only with the fuel. Exergy exits the engine accompanying heat and work, and with the products of combustion.
668 Chapter 13 Reacting Mixtures and Combustion

  If the power developed is taken to be the product of the engine, and the heat transfer and exiting product gas are regarded

  as losses, an exergetic efficiency expression that gauges the extent to which the exergy entering the engine with the fuel is

  converted to the product is

                                                                      #

                                                                e     Wcv
                                                                       #

                                                                      EF

  #

  where EF denotes the rate at which exergy enters with the fuel.

  Since the fuel enters the engine at 25C and 1 atm, which correspond to the values of T0 and p0 of the environment,

  and kinetic and potential energy effects are negligible, the exergy of the fuel is just the chemical exergy evaluated in

  Example 13.12(a). There is no thermomechanical contribution. Thus

                               #       #  ech    a1.8    10  3  kg    a47,346  kJ b  `  1  kW    `    85.2  kW
                               EF     mF                           b           kg       1  kJ/s

                                                                s

  The exergetic efficiency is then

                                                 e  a 37 kW b  0.434 143.4%2
                                                        85.2 kW

   The "waste heat" from large engines may be utilizable by some other device--for example, an absorption heat pump. In

      such cases, some of the exergy accompanying heat transfer and the exiting product gas might be included in the numera-

      tor of the exergetic efficiency expression. Since a greater portion of the entering fuel exergy would be utilized in such
      arrangements, the value of  would be greater than that evaluated in the solution.

                               In the next example, we evaluate an exergetic efficiency for a reactor.

  E X A M P L E 1 3 . 1 6 Exergetic Efficiency of a Reactor

  For the reactor of Example 13.9, determine the exergy destruction, in kJ per kmol of fuel, and devise and evaluate an exer-
  getic efficiency. Consider (a) complete combustion with the theoretical amount of air (b) complete combustion with 400%
  theoretical air. For the fuel, use the chemical exergy value determined in Example 13.12(a).

  SOLUTION

  Known: Liquid octane and air, each at 25C and 1 atm, burn completely in a well-insulated reactor operating at steady state.
  The products of combustion exit at 1 atm pressure.

  Find: Determine the exergy destruction, in kJ per kmol of fuel, and evaluate an exergetic efficiency for complete combus-
  tion with (a) the theoretical amount of air, (b) 400% theoretical air.

  Schematic and Given Data: See Fig. E13.9.

  Assumptions:

  1. See assumptions listed in Example 13.9.
  2. The environment is the same as that in Example 13.12(a).
  3. The combustion air enters at the condition of the environment.
  4. Kinetic and potential energy effects are negligible.

  Analysis: An exergy balance can be used in formulating an exergetic efficiency: At steady state, the rate at which exergy
  enters the reactor equals the rate at which exergy exits plus the rate at which exergy is destroyed within the reactor. Since the
  combustion air enters at the condition of the environment, and thus with zero exergy, exergy enters the reactor only with the
                                                                                                  Chapter Summary and Study Guide 669

                                                                                                                                                  #
  fuel. The reactor is well insulated, so there is no exergy transfer accompanying heat transfer. There is also no work Wcv. Ac-

  cordingly, exergy exits only with the combustion products. An exergetic efficiency can be written as

                                                                #

                                          e                     Eproducts
                                                                   #

                                                                    EF

  #                                                                 #

  where EF is the rate at which exergy enters with the fuel and Eproducts is the rate at which exergy exits with the combustion

  products. Using the exergy balance for the reactor, given above in words, the exergetic efficiency expression can be written

  alternatively as

                                          ##                                       #

                                   e      EF                    Ed          1    Ed
                                              #                                  #

                                              EF                                 EF

  The exergy destruction term appearing in the last expression can be found from the relation

                                          #                        T0      #
                                                                          scv
                                          Ed                               #
                                          #                               nF
                                          nF

                                                                    #
  where T0 is the temperature of the environment and scv is the rate of entropy production. The rate of entropy production is
  evaluated in the solution to Example 13.9 for each of the two cases. For the case of complete combustion with the theoretical

  amount of air

                    #

                    Ed    1298  K2  a5404        kJ                    #    b    1,610,392         kJ
                    #                         kmol                        K                       kmol
                    nF

  Similarly, for the case of complete combustion with 400% of the theoretical amount of air

                          #

                          Ed       12982  197542                          2,906,692   kJ
                          #
                          nF                                                          kmol

      Since the fuel enters the reactor at 25C, 1 atm, which correspond to the values of T0 and p0 of the environment, and ki-
  netic and potential effects are negligible, the exergy of the fuel is just the chemical exergy evaluated in Example 13.12(a).
  There is no thermomechanical contribution. Thus, for the case of complete combustion with the theoretical amount of air

                          e  1  1,610,392  0.702 170.2%2
                                     5,407,843

  Similarly, for the case of complete combustion with 400% of the theoretical amount of air

                          e     1     2,906,692                             0.463     1 46.3 % 2
                                      5,407,843

   The calculated efficiency values show that a substantial portion of the fuel exergy is destroyed in the combustion process.

      In the case of combustion with the theoretical amount of air, about 30% of the fuel exergy is destroyed. In the excess air
      case, over 50% of the fuel exergy is destroyed. Further exergy destructions would take place as the hot gases are utilized.
      It might be evident, therefore, that the overall conversion from fuel input to end use would have a relatively low exergetic
      efficiency. The vapor power plant exergy analysis of Sec. 8.6 illustrates this point.

  Chapter Summary and Study Guide

In this chapter we have applied the principles of thermody-            products of combustion. The application of energy balances
namics to systems involving chemical reactions, with em-               to reacting systems is then considered, including control vol-
phasis on systems involving the combustion of hydrocarbon              umes at steady state and closed systems. To evaluate the spe-
fuels. We also have extended the notion of exergy to include           cific enthalpies required in such applications, the enthalpy of
chemical exergy.                                                       formation concept is introduced and illustrated. The determi-
                                                                       nation of the adiabatic flame temperature is considered as an
   The first part of the chapter begins with a discussion of           application.
concepts and terminology related to fuels, combustion air, and
670 Chapter 13 Reacting Mixtures and Combustion

   The use of the second law of thermodynamics is also dis-           determine balanced reaction equations for the combus-
cussed. The absolute entropy concept is developed to provide            tion of hydrocarbon fuels, including complete and
the specific entropies required by entropy balances for sys-            incomplete combustion with various percentages of
tems involving chemical reactions. The related Gibbs func-              theoretical air.
tion of formation concept is introduced. The first part of the
chapter also includes a discussion of fuel cells.                     apply energy balances to systems involving chemical
                                                                        reactions, including the evaluation of enthalpy using
   In the second part of the chapter, we extend the exergy con-         Eq. 13.9 and the evaluation of the adiabatic flame
cept of Chap. 7 by introducing chemical exergy. The standard            temperature.
chemical exergy concept is also discussed. Means are developed
and illustrated for evaluating the chemical exergies of hydro-        apply entropy balances to systems involving chemical
carbon fuels and other substances. The presentation concludes           reactions, including the evaluation of the entropy
with a discussion of exergetic efficiencies of reacting systems.        produced.

   The following list provides a study guide for this chapter.        evaluate the chemical exergy of hydrocarbon fuels and
When your study of the text and end-of-chapter exercises has            other substances using Eqs. 13.35 and 13.36, as well as
been completed, you should be able to                                   the standard chemical exergy using Eqs. 13.44 and
                                                                        13.45.
 write out the meaning of the terms listed in the margin
   throughout the chapter and understand each of the re-              apply exergy analysis, including chemical exergy and the
   lated concepts. The subset of key concepts listed below              evaluation of exergetic efficiencies.
   is particularly important.

Key Engineering Concepts

complete                dry product                                  adiabatic flame          chemical exergy p. 655
   combustion p. 620       analysis p. 625                              temperature p. 642    standard chemical

air­fuel ratio p. 622   enthalpy of                                  fuel cell p. 645            exergy p. 659
theoretical air p. 622     formation p. 630                          absolute entropy p. 648
percent of theoretical
                        heating values p. 639
   air p. 623

Exercises: Things Engineers Think About

1. In a balanced chemical reaction equation, is mass conserved?      10. Why are some high-efficiency, residential natural gas fur-
Are moles conserved?                                                 naces equipped with drain tubes?

2. If a hydrocarbon is burned with the theoretical amount of air,    11. For a given fuel, how would the adiabatic flame temperature
can the combustion be incomplete?                                    vary if the percent of theoretical air were increased? Why?

3. If a hydrocarbon is burned with less than the theoretical         12. In which case would the adiabatic flame temperature be
amount of air, can the combustion be complete?                       higher, complete combustion of methane (CH4) with the theoret-
                                                                     ical amount of oxygen (O2), or complete combustion with the
4. For the case of Example 13.1(b), is the air­fuel mixture rich     theoretical amount of air, all initially at 298 K, 1 atm?
or lean?
                                                                     13. Why is combustion inherently an irreversible process?
5. What is the equivalence ratio for the reaction of Example 13.2?
                                                                     14. What irreversibilities are present in the internal combustion
6. Why is the combustion of hydrocarbons considered a con-           engine of Example 13.4? The combustion chamber of Example
tributor to global warming?                                          13.5?

7. When applying the energy balance to a reacting system, why        15. What is an advantage of using standard chemical exergies?
is it essential that the enthalpies of each reactant and product be  A disadvantage?
evaluated relative to a common datum?
                                                                     16. How might you define an exergetic efficiency for the
8. Why are some enthalpy of formation values in Tables A-25          hydrogen­oxygen fuel cell of Fig. 13.3b
positive and others negative?
                                                                     17. How might you define an exergetic efficiency for the reac-
9. If you knew the higher heating value of a hydrocarbon, CaHb,      tor of Example 13.5?
how would you determine its lower heating value?
                                                                    Problems: Developing Engineering Skills 671

Problems: Developing Engineering Skills

Working with Reaction Equations                                        (O2), 1.4% nitrogen (N2), 5.8% sulfur, and the rest noncom-
                                                                       bustile ash. For complete combustion with the theoretical
13.1 A vessel contains a mixture of 60% O2 and 40% CO on a             amount of air, determine
   mass basis. Determine the percent excess or percent deficiency
   of oxygen, as appropriate.                                          (a) the amount of SO2 produced, in kg per kg of coal.
                                                                       (b) the air­fuel ratio on a mass basis.
13.2 One hundred kmol of butane (C4H10) together with 4000
   kmol of air enter a furnace per unit of time. Carbon dioxide,    13.12 Octane (C8H18) burns completely with 120% of theoret-
   carbon monoxide, and unburned fuel appear in the products of        ical air. Determine
   combustion exiting the furnace. Determine the percent excess
   or percent deficiency of air, whichever is appropriate.             (a) the air­fuel ratio on a molar and mass basis.
                                                                       (b) the dew point temperature of the combustion products, in
13.3 Propane (C3H8) is burned with air. For each case, obtain
   the balanced reaction equation for complete combustion                   C, when cooled at 1 atm.

   (a) with the theoretical amount of air.                          13.13 Butane (C4H10) burns completely with 150% of theoret-
   (b) with 20% excess air.                                            ical air. If the combustion products are cooled at 1 atm to tem-
   (c) with 20% excess air, but only 90% of the propane being          perature T, plot the amount of water vapor condensed, in kmol
                                                                       per kmol of fuel, versus T ranging from 20 to 60C.
       consumed in the reaction.
                                                                    13.14 A gaseous fuel mixture with a molar analysis of 72%
13.4 Methane (CH4) burns completely with the stiochiometric            CH4, 9% H2, 14% N2, 2% O2, and 3% CO2 burns completely
   amount of hydrogen peroxide (H2O2). Determine the balanced          with moist air to form gaseous products at 1 atm consisting of
   reaction equation.                                                  CO2, H2O, and N2 only. If the dew point temperature of the
                                                                       products is 60C, determine the amount of water vapor pres-
13.5 A fuel mixture with the molar analysis 40% CH3OH, 50%             ent in the combustion air, in kmol per kmol of fuel mixture.
   C2H5OH, and 10% N2 burns completely with 33% excess air.
   Determine                                                        13.15 Acetylene (C2H2) enters a torch and burns completely
                                                                       with 110% of theoretical air entering at 25C, 1 atm, 50%
   (a) the balanced reaction equation.                                 relative humidity. Obtain the balanced reaction equation, and
   (b) the air­fuel ratio, both on a molar and mass basis.             determine the dew point temperature of the products, in C, at
                                                                       1 atm.
13.6 A natural gas with the molar analysis 78% CH4, 13% C2H6,
   6% C3H8, 1.7% C4H10, 1.3% N2 burns completely with 40%           13.16 Ethane (C2H6) enters a furnace and burns completely with
   excess air in a reactor operating at steady state. If the molar     130% of theoretical air entering at 25C, 85 kPa, 50% relative
   flow rate of the fuel is 0.5 kmol/h, determine the molar flow       humidity. Determine
   rate of the air, in kmol/h.
                                                                       (a) the balanced reaction equation.
13.7 A fuel mixture with the molar analysis of 20% CH4, 40%            (b) the dew point temperature of the combustion products, in
   H2, 40% NH3 burns completely with 150% of theoretical
   oxygen. Determine the balanced reaction equation.                        C, at 85 kPa.

13.8 Coal with the mass analysis 77.54% C, 4.28% H, 1.46% S,        13.17 A liquid fuel mixture that is 40% octane (C8H18) and 60%
   7.72% O, 1.34% N, 7.66% noncombustible ash burns com-               decane (C10H22) by mass is burned completely with 10% ex-
   pletely with 120% of theoretical air. Determine                     cess air at 25C, 1 atm, 80% relative humidity.

   (a) the balanced reaction equation.                                 (a) Determine the equivalent hydrocarbon composition, CaHb,
   (b) the amount of SO2 produced, in kg per kg of coal.                    of a fuel that would have the same carbon­hydrogen ratio
13.9 A coal sample has a mass analysis of 80.4% carbon, 3.9%                on a mass basis as the fuel mixture.
   hydrogen (H2), 5.0% oxygen (O2), 1.1% nitrogen (N2), 1.1%
   sulfur, and the rest is noncombustible ash. For complete com-       (b) If the combustion products are cooled to 25C at a pres-
   bustion with 120% of the theoretical amount of air, determine            sure of 1 atm, determine the amount of water vapor that
   the air­fuel ratio on a mass basis.                                      condenses, in kg per kg of fuel mixture.

13.10 A sample of dried feedlot manure is being tested for use      13.18 Carbon burns with 80% theoretical air yielding CO2, CO,
   as a fuel. The mass analysis of the sample is 42.7% carbon,         and N2 only. Determine
   5.5% hydrogen (H2), 31.3% oxygen (O2), 2.4% nitrogen (N2),
   0.3% sulfur, and 17.8% noncombustible ash. The sample is            (a) the balanced reaction equation.
   burned completely with 120% of theoretical air. Determine           (b) the air­fuel ratio on a mass basis.
                                                                       (c) the analysis of the products on a molar basis.
   (a) the balanced reaction equation.
   (b) the air­fuel ratio on a mass basis.                          13.19 Propane (C3H8) reacts with 80% of theoretical air to form
                                                                       products including CO2, CO, H2O, and N2 only. Determine
13.11 A sample of dried Appanoose County coal has a mass
   analysis of 71.1% carbon, 5.1% hydrogen (H2), 9.0% oxygen           (a) the balanced reaction equation.
                                                                       (b) the air­fuel ratio on a mass basis.
                                                                       (c) the analysis of the products on a dry molar basis.
672 Chapter 13 Reacting Mixtures and Combustion

13.20 Hexane (C6H14) burns with air to give products with the         Applying the First Law to Reacting Systems
   dry molar analysis of CO2, 11.5%; CO, 2.4%; O2, 2.0%; H2,
   1.6%; N2, 82.5%. Determine the air­fuel ratio on a molar           13.31 Propane (C3H8) at 25C, 1 atm enters a combustion cham-
   basis.                                                                ber operating at steady state and burns completely with the the-
                                                                         oretical amount of air entering at the same conditions. If the
13.21 The components of the exhaust gas of a spark-ignition              products exit at 25C, 1 atm, determine the rate of heat trans-
   engine using a fuel mixture represented as C8H17 have a dry           fer from the combustion chamber, in kJ per kmol of fuel.
   molar analysis of 8.7% CO2, 8.9% CO, 0.3% O2, 3.7% H2,                Kinetic and potential energy effects are negligible.
   0.3% CH4, and 78.1% N2. Determine the equivalence ratio.
                                                                      13.32 Methane gas (CH4) at 25C, 1 atm enters a steam gener-
13.22 Decane (C10H22) burns with 95% of theoretical air, pro-            ator operating at steady state. The methane burns completely
   ducing a gaseous mixture of CO2, CO, H2O, and N2. Determine           with 140% of theoretical air entering at 127C, 1 atm. Prod-
                                                                         ucts of combustion exit at 427C, 1 atm. In a separate stream,
   (a) the air­fuel ratio on a molar basis.                              saturated liquid water enters at 8 MPa and exits as superheated
   (b) the analysis of the products on a dry molar basis.                vapor at 480C with a negligible pressure drop. If the vapor
                                                                         mass flow rate is 3.7  105 kg/h, determine the volumetric
13.23 Butane (C4H10) burns with air, giving products having the          flow rate of the methane, in m3/h.
   dry molar analysis 11.0% CO2, 1.0% CO, 3.5% O2, 84.5% N2.
   Determine                                                          13.33 Liquid ethanol (C2H5OH) at 25C, 1 atm enters a com-
                                                                         bustion chamber operating at steady state and burns with air
   (a) the percent theoretical air.                                      entering at 227C, 1 atm. The fuel flow rate is 25 kg/s and
   (b) the dew point temperature of the combustion products, in          the equivalence ratio is 1.2. Heat transfer from the combus-
                                                                         tion chamber to the surroundings is at a rate of 3.75  105
        C, at 1 bar.                                                     kJ/s. Products of combustion, consisting of CO2, CO, H2O(g),
                                                                         and N2, exit. Ignoring kinetic and potential energy effects,
13.24 A fuel oil having an analysis on a mass basis of 85.7%             determine
   C, 14.2% H, 0.1% inert matter burns with air to give products
   with a dry molar analysis of 12.29% CO2; 3.76% O2; 83.95%             (a) the exit temperature, in K.
   N2. Determine the air­fuel ratio on a mass basis.                     (b) the air­fuel ratio on a mass basis.

13.25 Ethyl alcohol (C2H5OH) burns with air. The product gas          13.34 Benzene gas (C6H6) at 25C, 1 atm enters a combustion
   is analyzed and the laboratory report gives only the following        chamber operating at steady state and burns with 95%
   percentages on a dry molar basis: 6.9% CO2, 1.4% CO, 0.5%             theoretical air entering at 25C, 1 atm. The combustion prod-
   C2H5OH. Assuming the remaining components consist of O2               ucts exit at 1000 K and include only CO2, CO, H2O, and N2.
   and N2, determine                                                     Determine the mass flow rate of the fuel, in kg/s, to provide
                                                                         heat transfer at a rate of 1000 kW.
   (a) the percentages of O2 and N2 in the dry molar analysis.
   (b) the percent excess air.                                        13.35 The energy required to vaporize the working fluid pass-
                                                                         ing through the boiler of a simple vapor power plant is pro-
13.26 A fuel oil with the mass analysis 87% C, 11% H, 1.4%               vided by the complete combustion of methane with 110% of
   S, 0.6% inert matter burns with 120% of theoretical air. The          theoretical air. The fuel and air enter in separate streams at
   hydrogen and sulfur are completely oxidized, but 95% of the           25C, 1 atm. Products of combustion exit the stack at 150C,
   carbon is oxidized to CO2 and the remainder to CO.                    1 atm. Plot the mass flow rate of fuel required, in kg/h per MW
                                                                         of power developed by the plant versus the plant thermal effi-
   (a) Determine the balanced reaction equation.                         ciency, . Consider  in the range 30­40%. Kinetic and
   (b) For the CO and SO2, determine the amount, in kmol per             potential energy effects are negligible.

        106 kmol of combustion products (that is, the amount in       13.36 Methane (CH4) at 25C, enters the combustor of a sim-
        parts per million).                                              ple open gas turbine power plant and burns completely with
                                                                         400% of theoretical air entering the compressor at 25C, 1 atm.
13.27 Pentane (C5H12) burns with air so that a fraction x of the         Products of combustion exit the turbine at 577C, 1 atm. The
   carbon is converted to CO2. The remaining carbon appears as           rate of heat transfer from the gas turbine is estimated as 10%
   CO. There is no free O2 in the products. Develop plots of the         of the net power developed. Determine the net power output,
   air­fuel ratio and the percent of theoretical air versus x, for x     in MW, if the fuel mass flow rate is 1200 kg/h. Kinetic and
   ranging from zero to unity.                                           potential energy effects are negligible.

13.28 For the following mixture, determine the equivalence            13.37 Octane gas (C8H18) at 25C enters a jet engine and burns
   ratio and indicate if the mixture is lean or rich:                    completely with 300% of theoretical air entering at 25C,
                                                                         1 atm with a volumetric flow rate of 42 m3/s. Products of com-
   1 kmol of butane (C4H10) and 32 kmol of air.                          bustion exit at 990 K, 1 atm. If the fuel and air enter with neg-
                                                                         ligible velocities, determine the thrust produced by the engine
13.29 Octane (C8H18) enters an engine and burns with air to              in kN.
   give products with the dry molar analysis of CO2, 10.5%; CO,
   5.8%; CH4, 0.9%; H2, 2.6%; O2, 0.3%; N2, 79.9%. Determine
   the equivalence ratio.

13.30 Methane (CH4) burns with air to form products consist-
   ing of CO2, CO, H2O, and N2 only. If the equivalence ratio is
   1.25, determine the balanced reaction equation.
                                                                                 Problems: Developing Engineering Skills 673

13.38 Figure P13.38 provides data for a boiler and air preheater                 13.45 For each of the following fuels, plot the adiabatic flame
   operating at steady state. Methane (CH4) entering the boiler at                  temperature, in K, versus percent excess air for complete com-
   25C, 1 atm is burned completely with 170% of theoretical air.                    bustion in a combustor operating at steady state. The reactants
   Ignoring stray heat transfer and kinetic and potential energy                    enter at 25C, 1 atm.
   effects, determine the temperature, in C, of the combustion
   air entering the boiler from the preheater.                                      (a) carbon.
                                                                                    (b) hydrogen (H2).
                                                                    CH4             (c) liquid octane (C8H18).
                                                                    25°C, 1 atm
                                                                                 13.46 Propane gas (C3H8) at 25C, 1 atm enters an insulated re-
Air             Preheater  T=?    Boiler                                            actor operating at steady state and burns completely with air
25°C, 1 atm                797°C                                                    entering at 25C, 1 atm. Plot the adiabatic flame temperature
                                                                                    versus percent of theoretical air ranging from 100 to 400%.
Combustion                                                                          Why does the adiabatic flame temperature vary with increas-
gas at 662°C                                                                        ing combustion air?

                                  Feedwater  Steam                               13.47 Methane gas (CH4) at 25C, 1 atm enters an insulated re-
                                                                                    actor operating at steady state and burns completely with x%
 Figure P13.38                                                                      of theoretical air entering at 25C, 1 atm. Plot the adiabatic
                                                                                    flame temperature for x ranging from 100 to 400%.
13.39 A closed rigid vessel initially contains a gaseous mixture
   at 25C, 1 atm with the molar analysis of 25% ethylene (C2H4),                 13.48 Methane (CH4) at 25C, 1 atm, enters an insulated reac-
   75% oxygen (O2). The mixture burns completely and the prod-                      tor operating at steady state and burns with the theoretical
   ucts are cooled to 500 K. Determine the heat transfer between                    amount of air entering at 25C, 1 atm. The products contain
   the vessel and its surroundings, in kJ per kmol of fuel present                  CO2, CO, H2O, O2, and N2, and exit at 2260 K. Determine the
   initially, and the final pressure, in atm.                                       fractions of the entering carbon in the fuel that burn to CO2
                                                                                    and CO, respectively.
13.40 A closed, rigid vessel initially contains a gaseous mix-
   ture of 1 kmol of pentane (C5H12) and 150% of theoretical air                 13.49 Liquid methanol (CH3OH) at 25C, 1 atm enters an in-
   at 25C, 1 atm. If the mixture burns completely, determine the                    sulated reactor operating at steady state and burns completely
   heat transfer from the vessel, in kJ, and the final pressure, in                 with air entering at 100C, 1 atm. If the combustion products
   atm, for a final temperature of 800 K.                                           exit at 1256C, determine the percent excess air used. Neglect
                                                                                    kinetic and potential energy effects.
13.41 Determine the enthalpy of combustion for gaseous bu-
   tane (C4H10), in kJ per kmol of fuel and kJ per kg of fuel, at                13.50 A mixture of gaseous octane (C8H18) and 200% of theo-
   25C, 1 atm, assuming                                                             retical air, initially at 25C, 1 atm, reacts completely in a rigid
                                                                                    vessel.
   (a) water vapor in the products.
   (b) liquid water in the products.                                                (a) If the vessel were well-insulated, determine the tempera-
                                                                                         ture, in C, and the pressure, in atm, of the combustion
13.42 Determine the higher heating value, in kJ per kmol of                              products.
   fuel and in kJ per kg of fuel, at 25C, 1 atm for
                                                                                    (b) If the combustion products were cooled at constant vol-
   (a) liquid octane (C8H18).                                                            ume to 25C, determine the final pressure, in atm, and the
   (b) gaseous hydrogen (H2).                                                            heat transfer, in kJ per kmol of fuel.
   (c) liquid methanol (CH3OH).
   (d) gaseous butane (C4H10).                                                   13.51 A 5  103 kg sample of liquid benzene (C6H6) together
                                                                                    with 20% excess air, initially at 25C and 1 atm, reacts com-
   Compare with the values listed in Table A-25.                                    pletely in a rigid, insulated vessel. Determine the temperature,
                                                                                    in C, and the pressure, in atm, of the combustion products.
13.43 For a natural gas with a molar analysis of 86.5% CH4, 8%
   C2H6, 2% C3H8, 3.5% N2, determine the lower heating value,                    Applying the Second Law to Reacting Systems
   in kJ per kmol of fuel and in kJ per kg of fuel, at 25C, 1 atm.
                                                                                 13.52 Carbon monoxide (CO) at 25C, 1 atm enters an insu-
13.44 Liquid octane (C8H18) at 25C, 1 atm enters an insulated                       lated reactor operating at steady state and reacts completely
   reactor operating at steady state and burns with 90% of theo-                    with the theoretical amount of air entering in a separate stream
   retical air at 25C, 1 atm to form products consisting of CO2,                    at 25C, 1 atm. The products of combustion exit as a mixture
   CO, H2O, and N2 only. Determine the temperature of the ex-                       at 1 atm. For the reactor, determine the rate of entropy pro-
   iting products, in K. Compare with the results of Example 13.8                   duction, in kJ/K per kmol of CO entering. Neglect kinetic and
   and comment.                                                                     potential energy effects.

                                                                                 13.53 Carbon monoxide (CO) reacts with water vapor in an
                                                                                    insulated reactor operating at steady state to form hydrogen
                                                                                    (H2) and carbon dioxide (CO2). The products exit as a mixture
674 Chapter 13 Reacting Mixtures and Combustion

   at 1 atm. For the reactor, determine the rate of entropy            13.59 Streams of methane (CH4) and oxygen (O2), each at 25C,
   production, in kJ/K per kmol of carbon monoxide entering.              1 atm, enter a fuel cell operating at steady state. Streams of
   Neglect kinetic and potential energy effects. Consider two             carbon dioxide and water exit separately at 25C, 1 atm. If the
   cases:                                                                 fuel cell operates isothermally at 25C, 1 atm, determine the
                                                                          maximum theoretical work that it can develop, in kJ per kmol
   (a) the carbon monoxide and water vapor enter the reactor is           of methane. Ignore kinetic and potential energy effects.
        separate streams, each at 400 K, 1 atm.
                                                                       13.60 Streams of hydrogen (H2) and oxygen (O2), each at 1 atm,
   (b) the carbon monoxide and water vapor enter the reactor as           enter a fuel cell operating at steady state and water vapor ex-
        a mixture at 400 K, 1 atm.                                        its at 1 atm. If the cell operates isothermally at (a) 300 K,
                                                                          (b) 400 K, and (c) 500 K, determine the maximum theoretical
   Explain why the answers in parts (a) and (b) differ.                   work that can be developed by the cell in each case, in kJ per
                                                                          kmol of hydrogen flowing, and comment. Heat transfer with
13.54 A gaseous mixture of butane (C4H10) and 80% excess air              the surroundings takes place at the cell temperature, and ki-
   at 25C, 3 atm enters a reactor. Complete combustion occurs,            netic and potential energy effects can be ignored.
   and the products exit as a mixture at 1200 K, 3 atm. Coolant
   enters an outer jacket as a saturated liquid and saturated vapor    13.61 An inventor has developed a device that at steady state
   exits at essentially the same pressure. No significant heat trans-     takes in liquid water at 25C, 1 atm with a mass flow rate of
   fer occurs from the outer surface of the jacket, and kinetic and       4 kg/h and produces separate streams of hydrogen (H2) and
   potential energy effects are negligible. Determine for the jack-       oxygen (O2), each at 25C, 1 atm. The inventor claims that the
   eted reactor                                                           device requires an electrical power input of 14.6 kW when
                                                                          operating isothermally at 25C. Heat transfer with the sur-
   (a) the mass flow rate of the coolant, in kg per kmol of fuel.         roundings occurs, but kinetic and potential energy effects can
   (b) the rate of entropy production, in kJ/K per kmol of fuel.          be ignored. Evaluate the inventor's claim.
   (c) the rate of exergy destruction, in kJ per kmol of fuel, for
                                                                       13.62 Coal with a mass analysis of 88% C, 6% H, 4% O, 1% N,
       T0  25C.                                                           1% S burns completely with the theoretical amount of air.
                                                                          Determine
   Consider each of two coolants: water at 1 bar and ammonia at
   10 bar.                                                                (a) the amount of SO2 produced, in kg per kg of coal.
                                                                          (b) the air­fuel ratio on a mass basis.
13.55 Liquid ethanol (C2H5OH) at 25C, 1 atm enters a re-                  (c) For environmental reasons, it is desired to separate the SO2
   actor operating at steady state and burns completely with
   130% of theoretical air entering in a separate stream at 25C,              from the combustion products by supplying the products
   1 atm. Combustion products exit at 227C, 1 atm. Heat trans-                at 340 K, 1 atm to a device operating isothermally at 340 K.
   fer from the reactor takes place at an average surface tem-                At steady state, a stream of SO2 and a stream of the re-
   perature Tb. For Tb ranging from 25 to 200C, determine the                 maining gases exit, each at 340 K, 1 atm. If the coal is
   rate of exergy destruction within the reactor, in kJ per kmol              burned at a rate of 10 kg/s, determine the minimum theo-
   of fuel. Kinetic and potential energy effects are negligible.              retical power input required by the device, in kW. Heat
   Let T0  25C.                                                               transfer with the surroundings occurs, but kinetic and
                                                                              potential energy effects can be ignored.
13.56 A gaseous mixture of ethane (C2H6) and the theoretical
   amount of air at 25C, 1 atm enters a reactor operating at steady    Using Chemical Exergy
   state and burns completely. Combustion products exit at 627C,
   1 atm. Heat transfer from the reactor takes place at an average     13.63 For (a) carbon, (b) hydrogen (H2), (c) methane (CH4),
   surface temperature Tb. For Tb ranging from 25 to 600C, de-            (d) carbon monoxide, (e) liquid methanol (CH3OH), (f) nitro-
   termine the rate of exergy destruction within the reactor, in kJ       gen (N2), (g) oxygen (O2), (h) carbon dioxide, and (i) water,
   per kmol of fuel. Kinetic and potential energy effects are neg-        determine the chemical exergy, in kJ/kg, relative to the fol-
   ligible. Let T0  25C.                                                  lowing environment in which the gas phase obeys the ideal gas
                                                                          model:
13.57 Determine the change in the Gibbs function, in kJ per
   kmol of methane, at 25C, 1 atm for CH4  2O2 S CO2                                            Environment
   2H2O, using                                                                     T0  298.15 K (25C), p0  1 atm

   (a) Gibbs function of formation data.                               Gas Phase:  Component                      ye (%)
   (b) enthalpy of formation data, together with absolute entropy
                                                                                   N2                             75.67
        data.                                                                      O2                             20.35
                                                                                   H2O(g)
13.58 Separate streams of hydrogen (H2) and oxygen (O2) at                         CO2                             3.12
   25C, 1 atm enter a fuel cell operating at steady state, and liquid              Other                           0.03
   water exits at 25C, 1 atm. The hydrogen flow rate is 2  104                                                     0.83
   kmol/s. If the fuel cell operates isothermally at 25C, deter-
   mine the maximum theoretical power it can develop and the
   accompanying rate of heat transfer, each in kW. Kinetic and
   potentially energy effects are negligible.
                                                                             Problems: Developing Engineering Skills 675

13.64 The accompanying table shows an environment consist-                      (a) relative to the environment of Problem 13.63.
   ing of a gas phase and a condensed water phase. The gas phase                (b) using data from Table A-26.
   forms an ideal gas mixture.
                                                                             13.70 A mixture having an analysis on a molar basis of 85%
                         Environment                                            dry air, 15% CO enters a device at 125C, 2.1 atm, and a ve-
            T0  298.15 K (25C), p0  1 atm                                       locity of 250 m/s. If the mass flow rate is 1.0 kg/s, determine
                                                                                the rate exergy enters, in kW. Neglect the effect of gravity. Per-
            Condensed Phase: H2O(l) at T0, p0                                   form calculations

Gas Phase:                   Component                               ye (%)     (a) relative to the environment of Problem 13.63.
                                                                                (b) using data from Table A-26.
                               N2                                    75.67
                               O2                                    20.35   Exergy Analysis of Reacting and
                               H2O(g)                                        Psychrometric Systems
                               CO2                                    3.12
                               Other                                  0.03   13.71 Carbon at 25C, 1 atm enters an insulated reactor oper-
                                                                      0.83      ating at steady state and reacts completely with the theoretical
                                                                                amount of air entering separately at 25C, 1 atm. For the re-
(a) Show that the chemical exergy of the hydrocarbon CaHb                       actor, (a) determine the rate of exergy destruction, in kJ per
     can be determined as                                                       kmol of carbon, and (b) evaluate an exergetic efficiency. Per-
                                                                                form calculations relative to the environment of Problem 13.63.
e ch          c gF    aa     b             agCO2                                Neglect the effects of motion and gravity.
                             4 b gO2
                                                                             13.72 Propane gas (C3H8) at 25C, 1 atm and a volumetric flow
                b                          1  y  e   2  a     b4                rate of 0.03 m3/min enters a furnace operating at steady state
                2 gH2O1l2 d                      O2                             and burns completely with 200% of theoretical air entering at
                              RT0 ln    c                         d             25C, 1 atm. Combustion products exit at 227C, 1 atm. The
                                              1  y  e      2  a                 furnace provides energy by heat transfer at 227C for an in-
                                                    CO2                         dustrial process. For the furnace, compare the rate of exergy
                                                                                transfer accompanying heat transfer with the rate of exergy de-
(b) Using the result of part (a), repeat parts (a) through (c) of               struction, each in kJ/min. Let T0  25C and ignore kinetic
     Problem 13.63.                                                             and potential energy effects.

13.65 Showing all important steps, derive (a) Eq. 13.38,                     13.73 Figure P13.73 shows a coal gasification reactor making
   (b) Eq. 13.39 (c) Eq. 13.40, (d) Eqs. 13.41a, b (e) Eqs.                     use of the carbon­steam process. The energy required for the
   13.44 a, b.                                                                  endothermic reaction is supplied by an electrical resistor. The
                                                                                reactor operates at steady state, with no stray heat transfers and
13.66 Using data from Tables A-25 and A-26, together with                       negligible kinetic and potential energy effects. Evaluate in Btu
   Eq. 13.45, determine the standard molar chemical exergy, in                  per lbmol of carbon entering
   kJ/kmol, of
                                                                                (a) the required electrical input.
   (a) ammonia (NH3).                                                           (b) the exergy entering with the carbon.
   (b) propane (C3H8).                                                          (c) the exergy entering with the steam.
                                                                                (d) the exergy exiting with the product gas.
13.67 The chemical exergies of common hydrocarbons CaHb                         (e) the exergy destruction within the reactor.
   can be represented in terms of their respective lower heating
   value, LHV, by an expression of the form                                     Perform calculations relative to the environment of Problem
                                                                                13.63. Ignore kinetic and potential energy effects.
              e ch    c1       c21ba2         c3a
            1LHV2                                                                                                    Electrical
                                                                                                                        input
   where c1, c2, and c3 are constants. Evaluate the constants rel-
   ative to the environment of Problem 13.63 to obtain an ex-                Carbon (T0, p0)  Product gas at
   pression valid for several selected (a) gaseous hydrocarbons,                              1700°F, 1 atm
   (b) liquid hydrocarbons.                                                  Water vapor at
                                                                              600°F, 1 atm
13.68 Evaluate the specific flow exergy of water vapor, in kJ/kg,
   at 200C, 1 bar. Neglect the effects of motion and gravity. Per-                       C + 1.25H2O(g)  CO + H2 + 0.25H2O(g)
   form calculations                                                          Figure P13.73

   (a) relative to the environment of Problem 13.63.
   (b) using data from Table A-26.

13.69 Evaluate the specific flow exergy of an equimolar
   mixture of oxygen (O2) and nitrogen (N2), in kJ/kg, at 20C,
   1 atm. Neglect the effects of motion and gravity. Perform
   calculations
676 Chapter 13 Reacting Mixtures and Combustion

13.74 Carbon monoxide at 25C, 1 atm enters an insulated re-           13.78 Coal enters the combustor of a power plant with a mass
   actor operating at steady state and reacts completely with the        analysis of 49.8% C, 3.5% H, 6.8% O, 6.4% S, 14.1% H2O,
   theoretical amount of air entering in a separate stream at 25C,       and 19.4% noncombustible ash. The higher heating value of
   1 atm. The products exit as a mixture at 1 atm. Determine in          the coal is measured as 21,220 kJ/kg, and the lower heating
   kJ per kmol of CO                                                     value on a dry basis, (LHV)d, is 20,450 kJ/kg. The following
                                                                         expression can be used to estimate the chemical exergy of the
   (a) the exergy entering with the carbon monoxide.                     coal, in kJ/kg:
   (b) the exergy exiting with the products.
   (c) the rate of exergy destruction.                                ech      1LHV2d   a1.0438                      h                 o
                                                                                                             0.0013            0.1083
   Also, evaluate an exergetic efficiency for the reactor. Perform
   calculations relative to the environment of Problem 13.63. Ig-                                                    c                 c
   nore kinetic and potential energy effects.
                                                                              0.0549 n b  6740s
13.75 Liquid octane (C8H18) at 25C, 1 atm and a mass flow                                c
   rate of 0.57 kg/h enters a small internal combustion engine op-
   erating at steady state. The fuel burns with air entering the en-  where hc, oc, and nc denote, respectively, the mass ratio
   gine in a separate stream at 25C, 1 atm. Combustion products       of hydrogen to carbon, oxygen to carbon, and nitrogen to
   exit at 670 K, 1 atm with a dry molar analysis of 11.4% CO2,       carbon, and s is the mass fraction of sulfur in kg per kg of
   2.9% CO, 1.6% O2, and 84.1% N2. If the engine develops             fuel.4 The environment is closely the same as in Problem 13.64,
   power at the rate of 1 kW, determine                               but extended appropriately to account for the presence of sul-
                                                                      fur in the coal.
   (a) the rate of heat transfer from the engine, in kW.
   (b) an exergetic efficiency for the engine.                        (a) Using the above expression, calculate the chemical exergy
                                                                           of the coal, in kJ/kg.
   Use the environment of Problem 13.63 and neglect kinetic and
   potential energy effects.                                          (b) Compare the answer of part (a) with the values that would
                                                                           result by approximating the chemical exergy with each of
13.76 Evaluate an exergetic efficiency for the gas turbine power           the measured heating values.
   plant of Problem 13.36. Base exergy values on the environ-
   ment of Problem 13.63.                                             (c) What data would be required to determine the chemical
                                                                          exergy in this case using the methodology of Sec. 13.6?
13.77 Consider a furnace operating at steady state idealized as           Discuss.
   shown in Fig. P13.77. The fuel is methane, which enters at
   25C, 1 atm and burns completely with 200% theoretical air          13.79 For psychrometric applications such as those considered
   entering at the same temperature and pressure. The furnace de-        in Chap. 12, the environment often can be modeled simply as
   livers energy by heat transfer at an average temperature of           an ideal gas mixture of water vapor and dry air at temperature
   60C. Combustion products at 600 K, 1 atm are discharged to            T0 and pressure p0. The composition of the environment is de-
   the surroundings. There are no stray heat transfers, and kinetic      fined by the dry air and water vapor mole fractions yea, yve, re-
   and potential energy effects can be ignored. Determine in kJ          spectively. Show that relative to such an environment the flow
   per kmol of fuel                                                      exergy of a moist air stream at temperature T and pressure p
                                                                         with dry air and water vapor mole fractions ya and yv, re-
   (a) the exergy entering the furnace with the fuel.                    spectively, can be expressed on a molar basis as
   (b) the exergy exiting with the products.
   (c) the rate of exergy destruction.                                                  1yacpa      yvcpv2      c  T
                                                                           ef    T0  e                             ab
   Also, evaluate an exergetic efficiency for the furnace and com-                                                  T0
   ment. Perform calculations relative to the environment of
   Problem 13.63.                                                                               T                          p
                                                                                  1  ln a b d  R ln a b f
                                                                                                T0                         p0

                                                                                     RT0 c ya   ln  a  ya    b     yv  ln  a  yv    b  d

                                                                                                       y  e                   y  e
                                                                                                          a                      v

          Combustion products                                         where cpa and cpv denote the molar specific heats of dry air and
             at 600 K, 1 atm                                          water vapor, respectively. Neglect the effects of motion and
                                                                      gravity.

Methane                                        Heat transfer          13.80 For each of the following, use the result of Problem 13.79
(T0, p0)                                                                 to determine the specific flow exergy, in kJ/kg, relative to an
                                                                         environment consisting of moist air at 20C, 1 atm,   100%
   Air
(T0, p0)  Furnace                                                     (a) moist air at 20C, 1 atm,   100%.
                                                                      (b) moist air at 20C, 1 atm,   50%.
                                                                      (c) dry air at 20C, 1 atm.

                           Temperature = 60°C                         4Moran, Availability Analysis, pp. 192­193.
 Figure P13.77
                                           Design & Open Ended Problems: Exploring Engineering Practice 677

Design & Open Ended Problems: Exploring Engineering Practice

13.1D The term acid rain is frequently used today. Define what                                                    Saturated mixture
   is meant by the term. Discuss the origin and consequences of                                                         at 50C
   acid rain. Also discuss options for its control.
                                                                                                        Spray heads           Liquid
13.2D Many observers have expressed concern that the release                                                                  water
   of CO2 into the atmosphere due to the combustion of fossil fuels                           Direct-contact                  at
   is contributing to global warming. Write a paper reviewing the                      condensing heat exchanger              51C
   scientific evidence regarding the contribution of fossil fuel                     Feedwater Process steam
   combustion to global warming. Compare and contrast this ev-
   idence with comparable data for the combustion of biomass fuel                                                    Baffles
   derived from plant matter.
                                                                       Natural gas,                                           Liquid
13.3D About 234 million tires are discarded in the U.S. annu-          3.85 m3/min                                            water
   ally, adding to a stockpile of two to three billion scrap tires                                                            at
   from previous years. Write a memorandum discussing the po-                16%                                              56C
   tential advantages and disadvantages of using scrap tires as a        Excess air
   fuel. How does the heating value of scrap tires compare with
   the heating values of gasoline and commonly used coals? How
   does the ultimate analysis of scrap tires compare with the ul-
   timate analysis of commonly used coals?

13.4D A coal with the following ultimate analysis:

e  75.8%  C,  5.1%  H, 8.2% O, 1.5% N,  f                                            Boiler
    1.6%  S,  7.8%  noncombustible ash

   is burned in a power plant boiler. If all of the sulfur present in                        Combustion products
   the combustible portion of the fuel forms SO2, determine if the                                  at 207C
   plant would be in compliance with regulations regarding sul-
   fur emissions. Discuss options for removing SO2 from the stack       Figure P13.5D
   gas. Assess the effectiveness of various technologies available
   for this purpose and consider environmental problems                13.7D Figure P13.7D illustrates the schematic of an air preheater
   associated with them.                                                  for the boiler of a coal-fired power plant. An alternative design
                                                                          would eliminate the air preheater, supplying air to the furnace di-
13.5D Figure P13.5D shows a natural gas­fired boiler for steam            rectly at 30C and discharging flue gas at 260C. All other fea-
   generation integrated with a direct-contact condensing heat ex-        tures would remain unchanged. On the basis of thermodynamic
   changer that discharges warm water for tasks such as space             and economic analyses, recommend one of the two options for
   heating, water heating, and combustion air preheating. For             further consideration. The analysis of the coal on a mass basis is
   7200 h of operation annually, estimate the annual savings for
   fuel, in dollars, by integrating these functions. What other cost           576% C, 5% H, 8% O, 11% noncombustible ash6
   considerations would enter into the decision to install such a
   condensing heat exchanger? Discuss.                                    The coal higher heating value is 26,000 kJ/kg. The molar analy-
                                                                          sis of the flue gas on a dry basis is
13.6D A factory requires 3750 kW of electric power and high-
   quality steam at 107C with a mass flow rate of 2.2 kg/s. Two                   57.8% CO2, 1.2% CO, 11.4% O2, 79.6% N26
   options are under consideration:
                                                                       13.8D Fuel or chemical leaks and spills can have catastrophic
Option 1: A single boiler generates steam at 2.0 MPa, 320C,               ramifications; thus the hazards associated with such events
      supplying a turbine that exhausts to a condenser at 0.007           must be well understood. Prepare a memorandum for one of
      MPa. Steam is extracted from the turbine at 107C, return-           the following:
      ing as a liquid to the boiler after use.
                                                                          (a) Experience with interstate pipelines shows that propane
Option 2: A boiler generates steam at 2.0 MPa, 320C, sup-                      leaks are usually much more hazardous than leaks of nat-
      plying a turbine that exhausts to a condenser at 0.007 MPa.              ural gas or liquids such as gasoline. Why is this so?
      A separate process steam boiler generates the required
      steam at 107C, which is returned as a liquid to the boiler          (b) The most important parameter in determining the acciden-
      after use.                                                               tal rate of release from a fuel or chemical storage vessel is
                                                                               generally the size of the opening. Roughly how much faster
The boilers are fired with natural gas and 20% excess air. For                 would such a substance be released from a 1-cm hole than
7200 h of operation annually, evaluate the two options on the                  from a 1-mm hole? What are the implications of this?
basis of cost.
678 Chapter 13 Reacting Mixtures and Combustion

          Sm·a=tur2a×ted10v5akpgo/rh, 30 bar, Feedwater, 50°C

Coal, 25°C                                     Flue gas, 260°C             Flue gas,
                    Boiler                                      Preheater  150°C
                                                                           Air, 30°C,
                              Ash, 450°C,                                  1 atm,  = 30%
                              cp = 1.0 kJ/kgK
                                                                                                   Figure P13.7D

13.9D By the year 2010, as much as 60,000 MW of electric                          tional power systems such as gas turbines, what should be
   power could be generated worldwide by fuel cells. A step in                    the target installed cost for fuel cells? Discuss.
   this direction has been taken at Santa Clara, California, where            (d) What principal issues must be resolved for fuel cells to be
   a 2-MW fuel cell demonstration power plant was installed un-                    widely used to power automobiles and trucks? Write a re-
   der the auspices of a consortium of electric and gas utilities.                 port including at least three references.
   Report on the Santa Clara demonstration project in a brief
   memorandum. Include a schematic of the system. For further              13.10D Adapting procedures developed in the second part of
   study of fuel cells:                                                       this chapter, develop expressions for estimating the chemical
                                                                              exergy for each of several common coal types in terms of the
   (a) What are the principal features that make fuel cell tech-              coal ultimate analysis and available thermodynamic data.
        nology attractive for power generation? Is fuel cell per-
        formance limited by the Carnot efficiency? Discuss.                13.11D Airborne Soot Adds to Weather Woes, Some Say (see
                                                                              box, Sec. 13.1). Investigate the underlying modeling assump-
   (b) The types of fuel cells listed in Table 13.1 are considered            tions and characteristics of computer simulations used to
        to hold commercial promise. Investigate the specific                  predict global weather patterns. Write a report including at least
        realms of application of these fuel cell types. Write a re-           three references.
        port including at least three references.
                                                                           13.12D Goodbye Batteries, Hello Fuel Cells? (see box,
   (c) Stack life and installed cost are two parameters considered            Sec. 13.4). Investigate the advantages and disadvantages of
       critical for fuel cell development. What is meant by stack             hydrogen and methanol as fuels for fuel cell-powered
       life and why is it important? What is the projected installed          portable electronic devices. Write a report including at least
       cost, in $ per kW, of current fuel cell technology for large-          three references.
       scale power generation? To be competitive with conven-
Chemical and       C
Phase Equilibrium  H
                   A
                   P
                   T

                   14 E

                   R

E N G I N E E R I N G C O N T E X T The objective of the present chapter                           chapter objective
is to consider the concept of equilibrium in greater depth than has been done thus far. In
the first part of the chapter, we develop the fundamental concepts used to study chemical
and phase equilibrium. In the second part of the chapter, the study of reacting systems ini-
tiated in Chap. 13 is continued with a discussion of chemical equilibrium in a single phase.
Particular emphasis is placed on the case of reacting ideal gas mixtures. The third part of
the chapter concerns phase equilibrium. The equilibrium of multicomponent, multiphase,
nonreacting systems is considered and the phase rule is introduced.

   EQUILIBRIUM FUNDAMENTALS

In this part of the chapter, fundamental concepts are developed that are useful in the study
of chemical and phase equilibrium. Among these are equilibrium criteria and the chemical
potential concept.

14.1 Introducing Equilibrium Criteria                                                             thermodynamic
                                                                                                  equilibrium
A system is said to be in thermodynamic equilibrium if, when it is isolated from its sur-
roundings, there would be no macroscopically observable changes. An important requirement
for equilibrium is that the temperature be uniform throughout the system or each part of the
system in thermal contact. If this condition were not met, spontaneous heat transfer from one
location to another could occur when the system was isolated. There must also be no un-
balanced forces between parts of the system. These conditions ensure that the system is in
thermal and mechanical equilibrium, but there is still the possibility that complete equilib-
rium does not exist. A process might occur involving a chemical reaction, a transfer of mass
between phases, or both. The object of this section is to introduce criteria that can be applied
to decide whether a system in a particular state is in equilibrium. These criteria are devel-
oped using the conservation of energy principle and the second law of thermodynamics as
discussed next.

                                                                                                                      679
680 Chapter 14 Chemical and Phase Equilibrium

                           Consider the case of a simple compressible system of fixed mass at which temperature
                        and pressure are uniform with position throughout. In the absence of overall system motion
                        and ignoring the influence of gravity, the energy balance in differential form (Eq. 2.36)
                        is

                                                  dU  dQ  dW

                        If volume change is the only work mode and pressure is uniform with position throughout
                        the system, W  p dV. Introducing this in the energy balance and solving for Q gives

                                                  dQ  dU  p dV

                        Since temperature is uniform with position throughout the system, the entropy balance in
                        differential form (Eq. 6.33) is

                                                  dS  dQ  ds
                                                          T

                        Eliminating Q between the last two equations

                                                  T dS  dU  p dV  T ds                                  (14.1)

                           Entropy is produced in all actual processes and conserved only in the absence of irre-
                        versibilities. Hence, Eq. 14.1 provides a constraint on the direction of processes. The only
                        processes allowed are those for which ds  0. Thus

                                                  T dS  dU  p dV  0                                     (14.2)

S                          Equation 14.2 can be used to study equilibrium under various conditions.  for
                  Smax  example. . . a process taking place in an insulated, constant-volume vessel, where dU 
                        0 and dV  0, must be such that
           Fixed U, V
Gibbs function                                    dS 4 U,V  0                                           (14.3)

                        Equation 14.3 suggests that changes of state of a closed system at constant internal energy
                        and volume can occur only in the direction of increasing entropy. The expression also im-
                        plies that entropy approaches a maximum as a state of equilibrium is approached. This is a
                        special case of the increase of entropy principle introduced in Sec. 6.5.5. 

                           An important case for the study of chemical and phase equilibria is one in which tem-
                        perature and pressure are fixed. For this, it is convenient to employ the Gibbs function in
                        extensive form

                                                             G  H  TS  U  pV  TS

                        Forming the differential

                                                  dG  dU  p dV  V dp  T dS  S dT

                        or on rearrangement

                                               dG  V dp  S dT  1T dS  dU  p dV 2

                        Except for the minus sign, the right side of this equation is the same as the expression ap-
                        pearing in Eq. 14.2. Accordingly, Eq. 14.2 can be written as

                                                  dG  V dp  S dT  0                                     (14.4)

                        where the inequality reverses direction because of the minus sign noted above.
                                                           14.1 Introducing Equilibrium Criteria 681

   It can be concluded from Eq. 14.4 that any process taking place at a specified tempera- G     Fixed T, p
ture and pressure (dT  0 and dp  0) must be such that

                    dG 4 T,p  0                            (14.5)
                                                                                         Gmin

This inequality indicates that the Gibbs function of a system at fixed T and p decreases dur-
ing an irreversible process. Each step of such a process results in a decrease in the Gibbs
function of the system and brings the system closer to equilibrium. The equilibrium state is
the one having the minimum value of the Gibbs function. Therefore, when

                    dG 4 T,p  0                            (14.6) equilibrium criterion

we have equilibrium. In subsequent discussions, we refer to Eq. 14.6 as the criterion for
equilibrium.

   Equation 14.6 provides a relationship among the properties of a system when it is at an
equilibrium state. The manner in which the equilibrium state is reached is unimportant, how-
ever, for once an equilibrium state is obtained, a system exists at a particular T and p and no
further spontaneous changes can take place. When applying Eq. 14.6, therefore, we may spec-
ify the temperature T and pressure p, but it is unnecessary to require additionally that the
system actually achieves equilibrium at fixed T and fixed p.

 14.1.1 Chemical Potential and Equilibrium

In the present discussion, the Gibbs function is considered further as a prerequisite for ap-    multicomponent system
plication of the equilibrium criterion dG]T,p  0 introduced above. Let us begin by noting
that any extensive property of a single-phase, single-component system is a function of two

independent intensive properties and the size of the system. Selecting temperature and pres-

sure as the independent properties and the number of moles n as the measure of size, the
Gibbs function can be expressed in the form G  G(T, p, n). For a single-phase, multicomp-
onent system, G may then be considered a function of temperature, pressure, and the num-
ber of moles of each component present, written G  G(T, p, n1, n2, . . . , nj).

   If each mole number is multiplied by , the size of the system changes by the same fac-
tor and so does the value of every extensive property. Thus, for the Gibbs function we may

write

                       aG1T, p, n1, n2, . . . , nj2  G1T, p, an1, an2, . . . , anj2

Differentiating with respect to  while holding temperature, pressure, and the mole numbers
fixed and using the chain rule on the right side gives

G      0G     n1      0G     n2    #  #  #     0G      nj
     0 1an12        0 1an22                   0 1anj2

This equation holds for all values of . In particular, it holds for   1. Setting   1, the
following expression results:

                    j 0G
              G     a ni  a     b                          (14.7)
                             0ni T,p,nl
                    i1

where the subscript nl denotes that all n's except ni are held fixed during differentiation.
   The partial derivatives appearing in Eq. 14.7 have such importance for our study of

chemical and phase equilibrium that they are given a special name and symbol. The
682 Chapter 14 Chemical and Phase Equilibrium

                    chemical potential of component i, symbolized by i, is defined as

                                                            a  0G
chemical potential                                                b                                      (14.8)
                                               mi              0ni T,p,nl

                    The chemical potential is an intensive property. With Eq. 14.8, Eq. 14.7 becomes

                                                                      j                                  (14.9)

                                                         G  a nimi
                                                                   i1

                       The equilibrium criterion given by Eq. 14.6 can be written in terms of chemical poten-
                    tials, providing an expression of fundamental importance for subsequent discussions of equi-
                    librium. Forming the differential of G(T, p, n1, . . . , nj) while holding temperature and pres-
                    sure fixed results in

                                                            j 0G
                                               dG 4 T,p     aa       b        dni
                                                                  0ni T,p,nl
                                                            i1

                    The partial derivatives are recognized from Eq. 14.8 as the chemical potentials, so

                                                                    j                                    (14.10)

                                               dG 4 T,p  a mi dni
                                                                 i1

                    With Eq. 14.10, the equilibrium criterion dG]T,p  0 can be placed in the form

                                                           j                                             (14.11)

                                                         a mi dni  0

                                                         i1

                    Like Eq. 14.6, from which it is obtained, this equation provides a relationship among prop-
                    erties of a system when the system is at an equilibrium state where the temperature is T and
                    the pressure is p. Like Eq. 14.6, this equation applies to a particular state, and the manner
                    in which that state is attained is not important.

                     14.1.2 Evaluating Chemical Potentials

                    Means for evaluating the chemical potentials for two cases of interest are introduced in this
                    section: a single phase of a pure substance and an ideal gas mixture.

                    SINGLE PHASE OF A PURE SUBSTANCE. An elementary case considered later in this
                    chapter is that of equilibrium between two phases involving a pure substance. For a single
                    phase of a pure substance, Eq. 14.9 becomes simply

                                                                       G  nm

                    or

                                                         m     G    g                                    (14.12)
                                                               n

                    That is, the chemical potential is just the Gibbs function per mole.
                                                                                         14.1 Introducing Equilibrium Criteria 683

IDEAL GAS MIXTURE. An important case for the study of chemical equilibrium is that of
an ideal gas mixture. The enthalpy and entropy of an ideal gas mixture are given by

j                                                               j

H  a ni hi 1T 2 and S  a ni si 1T, pi2
i1                                                              i1

where pi  yi p is the partial pressure of component i. Accordingly, the Gibbs function takes
the form

      j                                                 j

G  H  TS  a ni hi 1T 2  T a ni si 1T, pi2
      i1                                               i1

      j

     a ni 3 hi 1T 2  T si 1T, pi2 4                                         1ideal gas2  (14.13)
         i1

Introducing the molar Gibbs function of component i

gi 1T, pi2  hi 1T 2  T si 1T, pi2 1ideal gas2                                            (14.14)

Equation 14.13 can be expressed as

            j                                              1ideal gas2                   (14.15)

G  a nigi 1T, pi2
          i1

Comparing Eq. 14.15 to Eq. 14.9 suggests that

    mi  gi 1T, pi2 1ideal gas2                                                           (14.16)

That is, the chemical potential of component i in an ideal gas mixture is equal to its Gibbs
function per mole of i, evaluated at the mixture temperature and the partial pressure of i in
the mixture. Equation 14.16 can be obtained formally by taking the partial derivative of
Eq. 14.15 with respect to ni, holding temperature, pressure, and the remaining n's constant,
and then applying the definition of chemical potential, Eq. 14.8.

   The chemical potential of component i in an ideal gas mixture can be expressed in an
alternative form that is somewhat more convenient for subsequent applications. Using
Eq. 13.23, Eq. 14.14 becomes

mi  hi 1T 2  T si 1T, pi2

      hi 1T 2                             T  as°i 1T 2       R  ln  yi p b
                                                                    pref

      hi 1T 2                             T  s°i 1T 2      RT   ln  yi p
                                                                    pref

where pref is 1 atm and yi is the mole fraction of component i in a mixture at temperature T
and pressure p. The last equation can be written compactly as

mi    g °i                            RT  ln  yi p         1ideal gas2                   (14.17)
                                              pref

where g °i is the Gibbs function of component i evaluated at temperature T and a pressure of
1 atm. Additional details concerning the chemical potential concept are provided in Sec. 11.9.
Equation 14.17 is the same as Eq. 11.144 developed there.
684 Chapter 14 Chemical and Phase Equilibrium

   CHEMICAL EQUILIBRIUM

In this part of the chapter, the equilibrium criterion dG]T,p  0 introduced in Sec. 14.1 is
used to study the equilibrium of reacting mixtures. The objective is to establish the
composition present at equilibrium for a specified temperature and pressure. An important
parameter for determining the equilibrium composition is the equilibrium constant. The equi-
librium constant is introduced and its use illustrated by several solved examples. The
discussion is concerned only with equilibrium states of reacting systems, and no information
can be deduced about the rates of reaction. Whether an equilibrium mixture would form
quickly or slowly can be determined only by considering the chemical kinetics, a topic that
is not treated in this text.

14.2 Equation of Reaction Equilibrium

In Chap. 13 the conservation of mass and conservation of energy principles are applied to
reacting systems by assuming that the reactions can occur as written. However, the extent to
which a chemical reaction proceeds is limited by many factors. In general, the composition
of the products actually formed from a given set of reactants, and the relative amounts of the
products, can be determined only from experiment. Knowledge of the composition that would
be present were a reaction to proceed to equilibrium is frequently useful, however. The equat-
ion of reaction equilibrium introduced in the present section provides the basis for determining
the equilibrium composition of a reacting mixture.

INTRODUCTORY CASE. Consider a closed system consisting initially of a gaseous mixture
of hydrogen and oxygen. A number of reactions might take place, including

                                               1H2           21O2  S  1H2O         (14.18)
                                                                   d               (14.19)
                                                                                   (14.20)
                                                       1H2 Sd 2H

                                                       1O2 dS 2O

   Let us consider for illustration purposes only the first of the reactions given above, in
which hydrogen and oxygen combine to form water. At equilibrium, the system will consist
in general of three components: H2, O2, and H2O, for not all of the hydrogen and oxygen ini-
tially present need be reacted. Changes in the amounts of these components during each dif-
ferential step of the reaction leading to the formation of an equilibrium mixture are governed
by Eq. 14.18. That is

                                               dnH2  dnH2O,        dnO2  21 dnH2O  (14.21a)

where dn denotes a differential change in the respective component. The minus signs signal
that the amounts of hydrogen and oxygen present decrease when the reaction proceeds to-
ward the right. Equations 14.21a can be expressed alternatively as

                                               dnH2          dnO2       dnH2O      (14.21b)
                                                  1                       1
                                                                  1
                                                                  2

which emphasizes that increases and decreases in the components are proportional to the sto-
ichiometric coefficients of Eq. 14.18.

   Equilibrium is a condition of balance. Accordingly, as suggested by the direction of the
arrows in Eq. 14.18, when the system is at equilibrium, the tendency of the hydrogen and
oxygen to form water is just balanced by the tendency of water to dissociate into oxygen and
hydrogen. The equilibrium criterion dG]T,p  0 can be used to determine the composition at
                                                                           14.2 Equation of Reaction Equilibrium 685

Thermodynamics in the News...

Iceland Aims to Be Fossil-Fuel Free                                 hydrogen fuel cells.
                                                                    The fuels cells will
The island nation of Iceland dares to dream about a future          emit only water, and
in which all energy needs are met domestically from their           thus also contribute to
abundant renewable hydroelectric and geothermal sources.            Iceland's societal goal
The key, Icelandic engineers say, is to take advantage of ex-       of reducing green-
tra renewable capacity to make hydrogen that can be used            house gas emissions.
to power cars, busses, and Iceland's large fishing fleet, all
presently using petroleum-based fuels. This will free Iceland           While cars and
completely from the need to import fossil fuels and make this       busses can store hy-
nation of 276,000 people energy self-sufficient. Iceland then       drogen fuel in special
will be able to claim the title of being the world's first          pressurized cylinders,
hydrogen economy.                                                   storage on board fish-
                                                                    ing vessels for cruises
    Iceland's fertilizer industry has long produced hydrogen        lasting up to six weeks presents unique challenges. The best
on a large scale using electricity generated from renewable         near-term solution, engineers say, is to use fuel cells running
sources to break down water through the process of                  on liquid methanol instead of hydrogen. They propose to syn-
electrolysis. By ramping up production, planners see all of the     thesize methanol from hydrogen and the carbon dioxide and
country's transportation needs eventually being met by              carbon monoxide emitted from industrial plants.

an equilibrium state where the temperature is T and the pressure is p. This requires evalua-
tion of the differential dG]T,p in terms of system properties.

   For the present case, Eq. 14.10 giving the difference in the Gibbs function of the mixture
between two states having the same temperature and pressure, but compositions that differ
infinitesimally, takes the following form:

                             dG 4 T, p  mH2 dnH2  mO2 dnO2  mH2O dnH2O       (14.22)
The changes in the mole numbers are related by Eqs. 14.21. Hence

dG 4 T, p    11mH2       1       1mH2O2                             dnH2O

                         2mO2

At equilibrium, dG]T,p  0, so the term in parentheses must be zero. That is

           1mH2    1         1mH2O                               0

                   2mO2

When expressed in a form that resembles Eq. 14.18, this becomes

             1mH2    1         1mH2O                                         (14.23)

                     2mO2

Equation 14.23 is the equation of reaction equilibrium for the case under consideration. The
chemical potentials are functions of temperature, pressure, and composition. Thus, the com-
position that would be present at equilibrium for a given temperature and pressure can be
determined, in principle, by solving this equation. The solution procedure is described in the
next section.

GENERAL CASE. The foregoing development can be repeated for reactions involving
any number of components. Consider a closed system containing five components, A, B,
C, D, and E, at a given temperature and pressure, subject to a single chemical reaction of
the form

           nAA     nBB  S  nCC    nDD                                        (14.24)
                        d

where the 's are stoichiometric coefficients. Component E is assumed to be inert and thus
does not appear in the reaction equation. As we will see, component E does influence the
686 Chapter 14 Chemical and Phase Equilibrium

                                equilibrium composition even though it is not involved in the chemical reaction. The form
                                of Eq. 14.24 suggests that at equilibrium the tendency of A and B to form C and D is just
                                balanced by the tendency of C and D to form A and B.

                                    The stoichiometric coefficients A, B, C, and D do not correspond to the respective
                                number of moles of the components present. The amounts of the components present are
                                designated nA, nB, nC, nD, and nE. However, changes in the amounts of the components
                                present do bear a definite relationship to the values of the stoichiometric coefficients.
                                That is

                      dnA  dnB  dnC  dnD                                                           (14.25a)
                          nA      nB  nC nD

                      where the minus signs indicate that A and B would be consumed when C and D are pro-
                      duced. Since E is inert, the amount of this component remains constant, so dnE  0.

                         Introducing a proportionality factor de, Eqs. 14.25a take the form

                      dnA  dnB  dnC  dnD  de
                      nA      nB      nC nD

                      from which the following expressions are obtained:

                      dnA  nA de,     dnB  nB de                                                   (14.25b)
                      dnC  nC de,     dnD  nD de

extent of reaction    The parameter e is sometimes referred to as the extent of reaction.
                         For the system under present consideration, Eq. 14.10 takes the form
equation of reaction                      dG 4 T, p  mA dnA  mB dnB  mC dnC  mD dnD  mE dnE
equilibrium
                      Introducing Eqs. 14.25b and noting that dnE  0, this becomes
                                                dG 4 T, p  1nAmA  nBmB  nC mC  nD mD2 de

                      At equilibrium, dG]T,p  0, so the term in parentheses must be zero. That is
                                                       nAmA  nBmB  nC mC  nDmD  0

                      or when written in a form resembling Eq. 14.24

                      nAmA  nBmB  nCmC  nDmD                                                       (14.26)

                         For the present case, Eq. 14.26 is the equation of reaction equilibrium. In principle, the
                      composition that would be present at equilibrium for a given temperature and pressure can
                      be determined by solving this equation. The solution procedure is simplified through the
                      equilibrium constant concept introduced in the next section.

                      14.3 Calculating Equilibrium Compositions

                      The objective of the present section is to show how the equilibrium composition of a system
                      at a specified temperature and pressure can be determined by solving the equation of reac-
                      tion equilibrium. An important part is played in this by the equilibrium constant.
                                                                     14.3 Calculating Equilibrium Compositions 687

 14.3.1 Equilibrium Constant for Ideal Gas Mixtures

The first step in solving the equation of reaction equilibrium, Eq. 14.26, for the equilibrium
composition is to introduce expressions for the chemical potentials in terms of temperature,
pressure, and composition. For an ideal gas mixture, Eq. 14.17 can be used for this purpose.
When this expression is introduced for each of the components A, B, C, and D, Eq. 14.26
becomes

nA ag °A    RT     ln  yA p b           nB ag °B    RT  ln  yBp b
                       pref                                 pref

    nC ag °C       RT      ln    yC p b       nD ag °D      RT  ln   yDp b          (14.27)
                                 pref                                pref

where g °i is the Gibbs function of component i evaluated at temperature T and the pressure
pref  1 atm. Equation 14.27 is the basic working relation for chemical equilibrium in a mix-
ture of ideal gases. However, subsequent calculations are facilitated if it is written in an

alternative form, as follows.

   Collect like terms and rearrange Eq. 14.27 as

1nCg C°  nDgD°  nAgA°  nBgB°2

  RT      anC  ln  yC p          nD     ln  yD p    nA  ln  yA p     nB  ln  yBp b  (14.28)
                   pref                     pref            pref             pref

The term on the left side of Eq. 14.28 can be expressed concisely as G°. That is

    ˘G°  nC g °C  nD g °D  nA g °A  nB g °B                                         (14.29a)

which is the change in the Gibbs function for the reaction given by Eq. 14.24 if each reac-
tant and product were separate at temperature T and a pressure of 1 atm. This expression can
be written alternatively in terms of specific enthalpies and entropies as

˘G°  nC 1hC  T s °C2  nD1hD  T s °D2  nA1hA  T s °A2  nB1hB  T s °B2                (14.29b)
       1nChC  nDhD  nAhA  nBhB2  T 1nC s °C  nDs °D  nAs °A  nBs °B2

Since the enthalpy of an ideal gas depends on temperature only, the h's of Eq. 14.29b are
evaluated at temperature T. As indicated by the superscript , each of the entropies is evalu-
ated at temperature T and a pressure of 1 atm.

   Introducing Eq. 14.29a into Eq. 14.28 and combining the terms involving logarithms into
a single expression gives

     ˘ G°                  c  y  nC  y  nD    p nCnDnAnB
       RT              ln     y  C   y  D   ab                    d                 (14.30)
                                            pref
                                 nA     nB
                                 A      B

Equation 14.30 is simply the form taken by the equation of reaction equilibrium, Eq. 14.26,
for an ideal gas mixture subject to the reaction Eq. 14.24. As illustrated by subsequent ex-
amples, similar expressions can be written for other reactions.

   Equation 14.30 can be expressed concisely as

                       ˘G°  ln K1T 2                                                (14.31)
                          RT
688 Chapter 14 Chemical and Phase Equilibrium

                             where K is the equilibrium constant defined by

equilibrium constant                                                         K1T2         y   nC  y  nD    p nCnDnAnB                                                                 (14.32)
                                                                                              C      D   ab

                                                                                          y   nA  y  nB   pref
                                                                                              A      B

                                Given the values of the stoichiometric coefficients, A, B, C, and D and the temperature
                             T, the left side of Eq. 14.31 can be evaluated using either of Eqs. 14.29 together with the ap-

                             propriate property data. The equation can then be solved for the value of the equilibrium con-

                             stant K. Accordingly, for selected reactions K can be evaluated and tabulated against temper-

                             ature. It is common to tabulate log10K or ln K versus temperature, however. A tabulation of
                             log10K values over a range of temperatures for several reactions is provided in Table A-27,
                             which is extracted from a more extensive compilation.

                             The terms in the numerator and denominator of Eq. 14.32 correspond, respectively, to the

                             products and reactants of the reaction given by Eq. 14.24 as it proceeds from left to right as

                             written.    For    the  inverse            reaction    nCC          nDD      S       nAA                  nBB,   the    equilibrium            constant  takes
                                                                                                          d

                             the form

                                                                                K*        y  nA  y  nB    p nAnBnCnD                                                                  (14.33)
                                                                                             A      B   ab

                                                                                          y  nC  yDnD    pref
                                                                                             C

                             Comparing Eqs. 14.32 and 14.33, it follows that the value of K* is just the reciprocal of K:
                             K*  1K. Accordingly,

                                                                                        log10 K*  log10K                                                                              (14.34)

                             Hence, Table A-27 can be used both to evaluate K for the reactions listed proceeding in the
                             direction left to right and to evaluate K* for the inverse reactions proceeding in the direction
                             right to left.

                                Example 14.1 illustrates how the log10K values of Table A-27 are determined. Subsequent
                             examples show how the log10K values can be used to evaluate equilibrium compositions.

E X A M P L E 1 4 . 1 Evaluating the Equilibrium Constant at a Specified Temperature

Evaluate  the  equilibrium  constant,    expressed      as     log10K,  for  the    reaction  CO            1  O2       d      CO2        at  (a)  298  K   and  (b)        2000  K.  Com-
                                                                                                            2           S

pare with the value obtained from Table A-27.

SOLUTION

Known:    The  reaction  is  CO       1  O2  S  CO2.
                                      2      d

Find: Determine the equilibrium constant for T  298 K (25C) and T  2000 K.

Assumption: The ideal gas model applies.

Analysis: The equilibrium constant requires the evaluation of G for the reaction. Invoking Eq. 14.29b for this purpose,
we have

                                         ˘G°         1hCO2            hCO    1  hO2  2    T 1s °CO2         s °CO           1  s  °O2  2
                                                                             2                                              2

where the enthalpies are evaluated at temperature T and the absolute entropies are evaluated at temperature T and a pressure
of 1 atm. Using Eq. 13.13, the enthalpies are evaluated in terms of the respective enthalpies of formation, giving

                                                            0

               ˘G°      3 1h°f2CO2    1h°f2CO     1  1  h°f 2  O2  4    3 1 ˘h2CO2      1 ˘h2CO          1  1  ˘  h  2  O2  4     T 1s °CO2          s °CO    1  s  °O2  2
                                                  2                                                      2                                                    2

where the ˘h terms account for the change in specific enthalpy from Tref  298 K to the specified temperature T. The en-
thalpy of formation of oxygen is zero by definition.
                                                                                         14.3 Calculating Equilibrium Compositions 689

(a) When T  298 K, the ˘h terms of the above expression for ˘G° vanish. The required enthalpy of formation and absolute
entropy values can be read from Table A-25, giving

                   ˘G°    3 1393,5202             1110,5302          1  1  0     2  4    298 3 213.69        197.54         1  1205.032  4
                                                                     2                                                      2

                         257,253 kJ/kmol

With this value for ˘G°, Eq. 14.31 gives

                                                        1257,253 kJ/kmol2
                                        ln K  18.314 kJ/kmol # K2 1298 K2  103.83

which corresponds to log10K  45.093.

Table A-27  gives  the  logarithm  to  the  base  10   of  the  equilibrium            constant  for  the    inverse  reaction: CO2         S d  CO    1  O2.  That
                                                                                                                                                       2

is, log10K*  45.066. Thus, with Eq. 14.34, log10K  45.066, which agrees closely with the calculated value.

(b) When T  2000 K, the ˘h and s° terms for O2, CO, and CO2 required by the above expression for G are evaluated
from Tables A-23. The enthalpy of formation values are the same as in part (a). Thus

            ˘G°           3 1393,5202             1110,5302       1  1  0  2  4        3 1100,804      93642    165408           86692
                                                                  2

                            1  167,881        86822 4      2000 3 309.210                258.600       1  1  268.655  2  4
                            2                                                                          2

                         282,990  5102  167,435  110,453 kJ/kmol

With this value, Eq. 14.31 gives

                                                               1110,4532
                                                  ln K  18.3142 120002  6.643

which corresponds to log10K  2.885.
    At 2000 K, Table A-27 gives log10K*  2.884. With Eq. 14.34, log10K  2.884, which is in agreement with the calculated

value.

Using the procedures described above, it is straightforward to determine log10K versus temperature for each of several specified
reactions and tabulate the results as in Table A-27.

 14.3.2 Illustrations of the Calculation of Equilibrium
                  Compositions for Reacting Ideal Gas Mixtures

It is often convenient to express Eq. 14.32 explicitly in terms of the number of moles that
would be present at equilibrium. Each mole fraction appearing in the equation has the form
yi  nin, where ni is the amount of component i in the equilibrium mixture and n is the
total number of moles of mixture. Hence, Eq. 14.32 can be rewritten as

                                K  n   nC  n  nD   p  p b ref nCnDnAnB                                                (14.35) 
                                       C      D   a   n

                                   n   nA  n  nB
                                       A      B

The value of n must include not only the reacting components A, B, C, and D but also all
inert components present. Since inert component E has been assumed present, we would
write n  nA  nB  nC  nD  nE.

   Equation 14.35 provides a relationship among the temperature, pressure, and composition
of an ideal gas mixture at equilibrium. Accordingly, if any two of temperature, pressure, and
composition are known, the third can be found by solving this equation.  for
example. . . suppose that the temperature T and pressure p are known and the object is
the equilibrium composition. With temperature known, the value of K can be obtained from
Table A-27. The n's of the reacting components A, B, C, and D can be expressed in terms
of a single unknown variable through application of the conservation of mass principle to
690 Chapter 14 Chemical and Phase Equilibrium

                                the various chemical species present. Then, since the pressure is known, Eq. 14.35 consti-
                                tutes a single equation in a single unknown, which can be solved using an equation solver
                                or iteratively with a hand calculator. 

                                    In Example 14.2, we apply Eq. 14.35 to study the effect of pressure on the equilibrium
                                composition of a mixture of CO2, CO, and O2.

E X A M P L E 1 4 . 2 Determining Equilibrium Composition Given Temperature and Pressure

One  kilomole  of  carbon  monoxide,    CO,    reacts     with    1  kmol    of   oxygen,       O2,    to  form   an  equilibrium  mixture  of  CO2,  CO,   and
                                                                  2

O2 at 2500 K and (a) 1 atm, (b) 10 atm. Determine the equilibrium composition in terms of mole fractions.

SOLUTION

Known:    A  system  initially     consisting  of  1  kmol    of  CO  and    1    kmol      of  O2  reacts    to  form  an  equilibrium  mixture  of  CO2,  CO,
                                                                             2

and O2. The temperature of the mixture is 2500 K and the pressure is (a) 1 atm, (b) 10 atm.

Find: Determine the equilibrium composition in terms of mole fractions.

Assumption: The equilibrium mixture is modeled as an ideal gas mixture.

Analysis: Equation 14.35 relates temperature, pressure, and composition for an ideal gas mixture at equilibrium. If any two
are known, the third can be determined using this equation. In the present case, T and p are known, and the composition is
unknown.

    Applying conservation of mass, the overall balanced chemical reaction equation is

                                                          1                          z
                                               1CO  2 O2 S zCO  2 O2  11  z2CO2

where z is the amount of CO, in kmol, present in the equilibrium mixture. Note that 0  z  1.
    The total number of moles n in the equilibrium mixture is

                                                         n  z  z  11  z2  2  z
                                                                      2                             2

Accordingly, the molar analysis of the equilibrium mixture is

                                        yCO           2z   ,         yO2          z      ,                 211  z2
                                                          z                             z         yCO2  2  z
                                                   2                         2    

    At equilibrium, the tendency of CO and O2 to form CO2 is just balanced by the tendency of CO2 to form CO and O2, so

we  have  CO2  dS  CO      1  O2.  Accordingly,    Eq.   14.35    takes   the     form
                           2

                                        z1z221 2          ppref          1  1  21              z           z      1 2 p 1 2
                                                         12  z22                                           
                                   K    11  z2        c               d                            a             ba b
                                                                                            1     z2          z       pref

At 2500 K, Table A-27 gives log10K  1.44. Thus, K  0.0363. Inserting this value into the last expression

                                                      0.0363          z      a       z       12 p 12                                                        (a)
                                                                                            ba b
                                                                     1z 2z                          pref

(a) When p  1 atm, Eq. (a) becomes

                                                                               z     a      z 12
                                                          0.0363                      2          b
                                                                          1       z             z

Using an equation solver or iteration with a hand calculator, z  0.129. The equilibrium composition in terms of mole fractions

is then

                           210.1292                                0.129                                        211  0.1292
                   yCO  2.129  0.121,                       yO2  2.129  0.061,                         yCO2  2.129  0.818
                                                                       14.3 Calculating Equilibrium Compositions 691

(b) When p  10 atm, Eq. (a) becomes

                                     0.0363    1  z  z  a   z     1 2  110212
                                                         2  
                                                                b
                                                               z

 Solving, z  0.062. The corresponding equilibrium composition in terms of mole fractions is yCO  0.06, yO2  0.03,
 yCO2  0.91.

 Comparing the results of parts (a) and (b) we conclude that the extent to which the reaction proceeds toward completion

    (the extent to which CO2 is formed) is increased by increasing the pressure.

 It is left as an exercise to show that if the mole fraction of CO2 in the equilibrium mixture at 2500 K were 0.93, the cor-

    responding pressure would be closely 22.4 atm.

   In Example 14.3, we determine the temperature of an equilibrium mixture when the pres-
sure and composition are known.

E X A M P L E 1 4 . 3 Determining Equilibrium Temperature Given Pressure and Composition

Measurements show that at a temperature T and a pressure of 1 atm, the equilibrium mixture for the system of Example 14.2
has the composition yCO  0.298, yO2  0.149, yCO2  0.553. Determine the temperature T of the mixture, in K.

SOLUTION

Known: The pressure and composition of an equilibrium mixture of CO, O2, and CO2 are specified.
Find: Determine the temperature of the mixture, in K.

Assumption: The mixture can be modeled as an ideal gas mixture.

Analysis: Equation 14.35 relates temperature, pressure, and composition for an ideal gas mixture at equilibrium. If any two
are known, the third can be found using this equation. In the present case, composition and pressure are known, and the tem-
perature is the unknown.

    Equation 14.35 takes the same form here as in Example 14.2. Thus, when p  1 atm, we have

                                     K 1T2           z  a      z   1 2

                                                  1z 2z           b

     where z is the amount of CO, in kmol, present in the equilibrium mixture and T is the temperature of the mixture.

         The solution to Example 14.2 gives the following expression for the mole fraction of the CO in the mixture: yCO 
     2z(2  z). Since yCO  0.298, z  0.35.

         Inserting this value for z into the expression for the equilibrium constant gives K  0.2078. Thus, log10K  0.6824.

 Interpolation in Table A-27 then gives T  2881 K.

 Comparing this example with part (a) of Example 14.2, we conclude that the extent to which the reaction proceeds to

    completion (the extent to which CO2 is formed) is decreased by increasing the temperature.

   In Example 14.4, we consider the effect of an inert component on the equilibrium
composition.
692 Chapter 14 Chemical and Phase Equilibrium

E X A M P L E 1 4 . 4 Considering the Effect of an Inert Component

One kilomole of carbon monoxide reacts with the theoretical amount of air to form an equilibrium mixture of CO2, CO, O2,
and N2 at 2500 K and 1 atm. Determine the equilibrium composition in terms of mole fractions, and compare with the result
of Example 14.2.

SOLUTION

Known: A system initially consisting of 1 kmol of CO and the theoretical amount of air reacts to form an equilibrium mix-
ture of CO2, CO, O2, and N2. The temperature and pressure of the mixture are 2500 K and 1 atm.

Find: Determine the equilibrium composition in terms of mole fractions, and compare with the result of Example 14.2.

Assumption: The equilibrium mixture can be modeled as an ideal gas mixture.

Analysis: For a complete reaction of CO with the theoretical amount of air

                                             CO        1  O2     1.88N2     S    CO2      1.88N2
                                                       2

Accordingly, the reaction of CO with the theoretical amount of air to form CO2, CO, O2, and N2 is

                            CO        1  O2     1.88N2        S  zCO        z         11    z2CO2     1.88N2
                                      2                                     2 O2

where z is the amount of CO, in kmol, present in the equilibrium mixture.
    The total number of moles n in the equilibrium mixture is

                                         n  z  z  11  z2  1.88  5.76  z
                                                          2                                 2

The composition of the equilibrium mixture in terms of mole fractions is

                                2z                            z                       211  z2                  3.76
                     yCO             ,          yO2                 ,       yCO2                 ,    yN2    5.76 
                            5.76    z                     5.76     z                  5.76      z                    z

At  equilibrium  we  have  CO2  S   CO       1  O2.  So   Eq.    14.35    takes  the  form
                                d            2

                                                 K        z1z221 2     c     ppref         1 2
                                                                          15.76  z22
                                                          11  z2                          d

The value of K is the same as in the solution to Example 14.2, K  0.0363. Thus, since p  1 atm, we have

                                                     0.0363  z a                  z    1 2

                                                                   1  z 5.76  z       b

Solving, z  0.175. The corresponding equilibrium composition is yCO  0.059, yCO2  0.278, yO2  0.029, yN2  0.634.
    Comparing this example with Example 14.2, we conclude that the presence of the inert component nitrogen reduces the

extent to which the reaction proceeds toward completion at the specified temperature and pressure (reduces the extent to which
CO2 is formed).

                             In the next example, the equilibrium concepts of this chapter are applied together with
                          the energy balance for reacting systems developed in Chap. 13.

E X A M P L E 1 4 . 5 Using Equilibrium Concepts and the Energy Balance

Carbon dioxide at 25C, 1 atm enters a reactor operating at steady state and dissociates, giving an equilibrium mixture of CO2,
CO, and O2 that exits at 3200 K, 1 atm. Determine th#e heat transfer to the reactor, in kJ per kmol of CO2 entering. The effects
of kinetic and potential energy can be ignored and Wcv  0.
                                                                                               14.3 Calculating Equilibrium Compositions 693

SOLUTION

Known: Carbon dioxide at 25C, 1 atm enters a reactor at steady state. An equilibrium mixture of CO2, CO, and O2 exits at
3200 K, 1 atm.

Find: Determine the heat transfer to the reactor, in kJ per kmol of CO2 entering.
Schematic and Given Data:

                                Q· cv                (CO2, CO, O2)          Assumptions:
    CO2                                              3200 K, 1 atm
25°C, 1 atm                                                                 1. The control volume shown on the acc#ompanying sketch by a
                                                                            dashed line operates at steady state with Wcv  0. Kinetic energy
                                                                            and potential energy effects can be ignored.

                                                                            2. The entering CO2 is modeled as an ideal gas.
                                                                            3. The exiting mixture of CO2, CO, and O2 is an equilibrium ideal
                                                                            gas mixture.

                                                                             Figure E14.5

Analysis: The required heat transfer can be determined from an energy rate balance for the control volume, but first the
composition of the exiting equilibrium mixture must be determined.

    Applying the conservation of mass principle, the overall dissociation reaction is described by

                                                    CO2   S  zCO2       11     z2 CO       a1        zb   O2
                                                                                                  2

where z is the amount of CO2, in kmol, present in the mixture exiting the control volume, per kmol of CO2 entering. The total
number of moles n in the mixture is then

                                                       n  z  11  z2  a1  zb  3  z
                                                                                    2             2

The exiting mixture is assumed to be an equilibrium mixture (assumption 3). Thus, for the mixture we have

CO 2  S  CO    21O2.  Equation         14.35  takes  the  form
      d

                                                       11    z2  3 11   z22 4 12       ppref         1    1  2    1
                                                                   z                  13  z22
                                                 K                                 c              d

Rearranging and noting that p  1 atm

                                                                   a1       zb  a1      z   1  2
                                                                        z        3    
                                                             K                          z  b

At 3200 K, Table A-27 gives log10K  0.189. Thus, K  0.647, and the equilibrium constant expression becomes

                                                            0.647    a1        zb  a1      z 12
                                                                            z       3       b
                                                                                           z

Solving, z  0.422. The composition of the exiting equilibrium mixture, in kmol per kmol of CO2 entering, is then (0.422CO2,
0.578CO, 0.289O2).

    When expressed per kmol of CO2 entering the control volume, the energy rate balance reduces by assumption 1 to

                                              #        #0

                                       0      Qcv     Wcv     hCO2      10.422hCO2  0.578hCO  0.289hO22
                                              #       #
                                              nCO2    nCO2

Solving for the heat transfer per kmol of CO2 entering, and evaluating each enthalpy in terms of the respective enthalpy

of formation

                      #                                                                                 0                            0

                      Qcv     0.4221h°f          ˘h2CO2      0.5781h°f      ˘h2CO       0.2891h°f            ˘h2O2     1h°f   ˘h2 CO2
                      #
                      nCO2

The enthalpy of formation of O2 is zero by definition; ˘h for the CO2 at the inlet vanishes because CO2 enters at 25C.
694 Chapter 14 Chemical and Phase Equilibrium

  With enthalpy of formation values from Tables A-25 and ˘h values for O2, CO, and CO2, from Table A-23

  #

  Qcv     0.422 3393,520    1174,695             93642 4    0.578 3 110,530                1109,667    86692 4
  #
  nCO2

           0.2891114,809  86822  1393,5202

         322,385 kJ/kmol 1CO22

   For comparison, let us determine the heat transfer if we assume no dissociation--namely, when CO2 alone exits the re-

      actor. With data from Table A-23, the heat transfer is

          #

          Qcv               hCO213200          K2    hCO2  1298  K2
          #
          n CO2

                           174,695  9364  165,331 kJ/kmol 1CO22

  The value is much less than the value obtained in the solution above because the dissociation of CO2 requires more energy
  input (an endothermic reaction).

           14.3.3 Equilibrium Constant for Mixtures and Solutions1

          The procedures that led to the equilibrium constant for reacting ideal gas mixtures can be
          followed for the general case of reacting mixtures by using the fugacity and activity con-
          cepts introduced in Sec. 11.9. In principle, equilibrium compositions of such mixtures can
          be determined with an approach paralleling the one for ideal gas mixtures.

             Equation 11.141 can be used to evaluate the chemical potentials appearing in the equa-
          tion of reaction equilibrium (Eq. 14.26). The result is

          nA1g A°  RT ln aA2  nB1g B°  RT ln aB2  nC1g °C  RT ln aC2  nD1g °D  RT ln aD2
                                                                                                                         (14.36)

          where g °i is the Gibbs function of pure component i at temperature T and the pressure pref 
          1 atm, and ai is the activity of that component.

             Collecting terms and employing Eq. 14.29a, Eq. 14.36 becomes

                                                           ˘ G°       ln  a  a  nC  a  nD  b                    (14.37)
                                                             RT              a  C   a  D

                                                                                nA     nB
                                                                                A      B

          This equation can be expressed in the same form as Eq. 14.31 by defining the equilibrium
          constant as

                                                                 K    a  nC  a  nD                              (14.38)
                                                                         C      D

                                                                      a  nA  a  nB
                                                                         A      B

            Since Table A-27 and similar compilations are constructed simply by evaluating ˘G°RT

          for specified reactions at several temperatures, such tables can be employed to evaluate the

          more general equilibrium constant given by Eq. 14.38. However, before Eq. 14.38 can be

          used to determine the equilibrium composition for a known value of K, it is necessary to

          evaluate the activity of the various mixture components. Let us illustrate this for the case of

          mixtures that can be modeled as ideal solutions.

          1This section requires study of Sec. 11.9.
                                                                  14.4 Further Examples of the Use of the Equilibrium Constant 695

IDEAL SOLUTIONS. For an ideal solution, the activity of component i is given by

                                               ai          yi fi                                                     (11.142)
                                                           f °i

where fi is the fugacity of pure i at the temperature T and pressure p of the mixture, and f °i
is the fugacity of pure i at temperature T and the pressure pref. Using this expression to eval-
uate aA, aB, aC, and aD, Eq. 14.38 becomes

                                    K  1yC fC f °C2nC 1yD fD f °D2nD                                                 (14.39a)
                                         1yA fA f °A2nA1yB fB f °B2nB

which can be expressed alternatively as

    K1                            1                        pref2nB d        nC     nD             nC  nD  nA  nB
  c  1  fC  p2nC 1 fD  p2nD    c  1  f  °A  pref2nA1 f °B  pref2nD    c  y  C   y  D   a  p                       d  (14.39b)
        fA  p2nA 1 fB       d        f  °C  pref2nC1 f °D                y                pref  b
                                                                            nA  y  nB
                       p2nB                                                 A      B

The ratios of fugacity to pressure in this equation can be evaluated, in principle, from
Eq. 11.124 or the generalized fugacity chart, Fig. A-6, developed from it. In the special case
when each component behaves as an ideal gas at both T, p and T, pref, these ratios equal unity
and Eq. 14.39b reduces to the underlined term, which is just Eq. 14.32.

14.4 Further Examples of the Use of the
           Equilibrium Constant

Some additional aspects of the use of the equilibrium constant are introduced in this section:
the equilibrium flame temperature, the van't Hoff equation, and chemical equilibrium for
ionization reactions and simultaneous reactions. To keep the presentation at an introductory
level, only the case of ideal gas mixtures is considered.

 14.4.1 Determining Equilibrium Flame Temperature

In this section, the effect of incomplete combustion on the adiabatic flame temperature, intro-
duced in Sec. 13.3, is considered using concepts developed in the present chapter. We begin with
a review of some ideas related to the adiabatic flame temperature by considering a reactor
operating at steady state for which no significant heat transfer with the surroundings takes place.

   Let carbon monoxide gas entering at one location react completely with the theoretical
amount of air entering at another location as follows:

                       CO  12O2  1.88N2 S CO2  1.88N2

As discussed in Sec. 13.3, the products would exit the reactor at a temperature we have
designated the maximum adiabatic flame temperature. This temperature can be determined
by solving a single equation, the energy equation. At such an elevated temperature, however,
there would be a tendency for CO2 to dissociate

                                            CO2 S CO  21O2

Since dissociation requires energy (an endothermic reaction), the temperature of the prod-
ucts would be less than the maximum adiabatic temperature found under the assumption of
complete combustion.

   When dissociation takes place, the gaseous products exiting the reactor would not be CO2 and
N2, but a mixture of CO2, CO, O2, and N2. The balanced chemical reaction equation would read

        CO    1  O2      1.88N2             S  z CO        11         z2CO2               z       1.88N2             (14.40)
              2                                                                           2 O2
696 Chapter 14 Chemical and Phase Equilibrium

                   where z is the amount of CO, in kmol, present in the exiting mixture for each kmol of CO

                   entering the reactor.

                                   Accordingly, there are two unknowns: z and the temperature of the exiting stream. To

                   solve a problem with two unknowns requires two equations. One is provided by an energy

                   equation. If the exiting gas mixture is in equilibrium, the other equation is provided by the

                   equilibrium constant, Eq. 14.35. The temperature of the products may then be called the

equilibrium flame  equilibrium flame temperature. The equilibrium constant used to evaluate the equilibrium
temperature
                   flame           temperature  would  be  determined  with  respect  to  CO2  S  CO    12O2.
                                                                                               d

                                   Although only the dissociation of CO2 has been discussed, other products of combustion

                   may dissociate, for example

                                                           H2O         S  H2    1  O2
                                                                       d        2

                                                           H2O         S  OH       12H2
                                                                       d

                                                           O2 dS 2O

                                                           N2 dS 2H

                                                           N2 dS 2N

                   When there are many dissociation reactions, the study of chemical equilibrium is facilitated
                   by the use of computers to solve the simultaneous equations that result. Simultaneous reac-
                   tions are considered in Sec. 14.4.4. The following example illustrates how the equilibrium
                   flame temperature is determined when one dissociation reaction occurs.

E X A M P L E 1 4 . 6 Determining the Equilibrium Flame Temperature

Carbon monoxide at 25C, 1 atm enters a well-insulated reactor and reacts with the theoretical amount of air entering at the
same temperature and pressure. An equilibrium mixture of CO2, CO, O2, and N2 exits the reactor at a pressure of 1 atm. For
steady-state operation and negligible effects of kinetic and potential energy, determine the composition and temperature of the
exiting mixture in K.

SOLUTION
Known: Carbon monoxide at 25C, 1 atm reacts with the theoretical amount of air at 25C, 1 atm to form an equilibrium
mixture of CO2, CO, O2, and N2 at temperature T and a pressure of 1 atm.
Find: Determine the composition and temperature of the exiting mixture.

Schematic and Given Data:

                           CO      Insulation                             Assumptions:
                      25°C, 1 atm
                                                (CO2, CO, O2, N2)         1. The control volume shown on the accompany-
     Air                                              T, 1 atm            ing ske# tch by a d# ashed line operates at steady state
25°C, 1 atm                                                               with Qcv  0, Wcv  0, and negligible effects of
                                                                          kinetic and potential energy.
                                                                          2. The entering gases are modeled as ideal gases.
                                                                          3. The exiting mixture is an ideal gas mixture at
                                                                          equilibrium.

                                                                           Figure E14.6
                                                       14.4 Further Examples of the Use of the Equilibrium Constant 697

Analysis: The overall reaction is the same as in the solution to Example 14.4

       CO                           1  O2    1.88N2    S  z CO       z        11       z2 CO2      1.88N2
                                    2                                2 O2

By assumption 3, the exiting mixture is an equilibrium mixture. The equilibrium constant expression developed in the solu-
tion to Example 14.4 is

                                                       z1z 2212           ppref         1  2

                                             K1T 2     11  z2    a   1  5.76  z  2  2  b                   (a)

Since p  1 atm, Eq. (a) reduces to

                                                              z            z        1 2

                                             K1T 2        11     z2  a           b                         (b)
                                                                      5.76      z

This equation involves two unknowns: z and the temperature T of the exiting equilibrium mixture.
    Another equation involving the two unknowns is obtained from the energy rate balance, Eq. 13.12b, which reduces with

assumption 1 to

                                                              hR  hP                                       (c)

where

                                                    0     10            0                     0    0

           hR  1h°f  ˘h 2CO  2 1h°f  ˘h 2O2 1.881h°f  ˘h 2N2

and

                                             z0                                                       0

       hP  z1h°f  ˘h2CO  2 1h°f  ˘h2O2  11  z2 1h°f  ˘h2CO2  1.881h°f  ˘h2N2

The enthalpy of formation terms set to zero are those for oxygen and nitrogen. Since the reactants enter at 25C, the corre-
sponding ˘h terms also vanish. Collecting and rearranging, we get

       z
       z 1 ˘h2CO  2 1 ˘h2O2  11  z2 1 ˘h2CO2  1.881 ˘h2N2  11  z2 3 1h°f 2CO2  1h°f 2CO 4  0               (d)

Equations (b) and (d) are simultaneous equations involving the unknowns z and T. When solved iteratively using tabular data,
the results are z  0.125 and T  2399 K, as can be verified. The composition of the equilibrium mixture, in kmol per kmol
of CO entering the reactor, is then 0.125CO, 0.0625O2, 0.875CO2, 1.88N2.

   As illustrated by Example 14.7, the equation solver and property retrieval features of
Interactive Thermodynamics: IT allow the equilibrium flame temperature and composition
to be determined without the iteration required when using table data.

    E X A M P L E 1 4 . 7 Determining the Equilibrium Flame Temperature Using Software

    Solve Example 14.6 using Interactive Thermodynamics: IT and plot equilibrium flame temperature and z, the amount of CO
    present in the exiting mixture, each versus pressure ranging from 1 to 10 atm.

    SOLUTION
    Known: See Example 14.6.
698 Chapter 14 Chemical and Phase Equilibrium

  Find: Using IT, plot the equilibrium flame temperature and the amount of CO present in the exiting mixture of Example 14.6,
  each versus pressure ranging from 1 to 10 atm.

  Assumptions: See Example 14.6.

  Analysis: Equation (a) of Example 14.6 provides the point of departure for the IT solution

                                                     z1z 2212         ppref       1  2
                                                                   15.76  z22
                                        K1T 2        11  z2     c              d              (a)

  For a given pressure, this expression involves two unknowns: z and T.
      Also, from Example 14.6, we use the energy balance, Eq. (c)

                                                           hR  hP                             (c)

  where

                                        hR         1hCO2R    1  1hO22R    1.881hN22R
                                                             2

  and

                                 hP  z1hCO2P  1z 22 1hO22P  11  z2 1hCO22P  1.881hN22P

  where the subscripts R and P denote reactants and products, respectively, and z denotes the amount of CO in the products, in
  kmol per kmol of CO entering.

      With pressure known, Eqs. (a) and (c) can be solved for T and z using the following IT code. Choosing SI from the Units
  menu and amount of substance in moles, and letting hCO_R denote the specific enthalpy of CO in the reactants, and so on,
  we have

  // Given data
  TR = 25 + 273.15 // K
  p = 1 // atm
  pref = 1 // atm

  // Evaluating the equilibrium constant using Eq. (a)
  K = ((z * (z/2)^0.5) / (1 ­ z)) * ((p / pref) / ((5.76 + z) / 2))^0.5

  // Energy balance: Eq. (c)
  hR = hP
  hR = hCO_R + (1/2) * hO2_R + 1.88 * hN2_R
  hP = z * hCO_P + (z / 2) * hO2_P + (1 ­ z) * hCO2_P + 1.88 * hN2_P

  hCO_R = h_T("CO",TR)
  hO2_R = h_T("O2",TR)
  hN2_R = h_T("N2",TR)
  hCO_P = h_T("CO",T)
  hO2_P = h_T("O2",T)
  hCO2_P = h_T("CO2",T)
  hN2_P = h_T("N2",T)

  /* To obtain data for the equilibrium constant use the Lookup Table

  option under the Edit menu. Load the file "eqco2.lut". Data for

  CO2    S  CO  +  1/2  O2  from Table  A-27  are  stored  in   the  look-up  table
         d

  as T in column 1 and log10(K) in column 2. To retrieve the data use

  */

  log(K) = lookupval(eqco2,1,T,2)

  Obtain a solution for p  1 using the Solve button. To ensure rapid convergence, restrict T and K to positive values, and set
  a lower limit of 0.001 and an upper limit of 0.999 for z. The results are T  2399 K and z  0.1249, which agree with the
  values obtained in Example 14.6.
                                                                      14.4 Further Examples of the Use of the Equilibrium Constant 699

    Now, use the Explore button and sweep p from 1 to 10 atm in steps of 0.01. Using the Graph button, construct the
following plots:

2500                                                                         0.2

2450                                                                         0.15

T (K)                                                                        0.1
                                                                          z
2400

2350                                                                         0.05

       2300                                                                  0
             1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10                                             1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
                                      p (atm)
                                                                                                       p (atm)
 Figure E14.7

    From Fig. E14.7, we see that as pressure increases more CO is oxidized to CO2 (z decreases) and temperature increases.

 Similar files are included in IT for each of the reactions in Table A-27.

 14.4.2 Van't Hoff Equation

The dependence of the equilibrium constant on temperature exhibited by the values of
Table A-27 follows from Eq. 14.31. An alternative way to express this dependence is given
by the van't Hoff equation, Eq. 14.43b.

   The development of this equation begins by introducing Eq. 14.29b into Eq. 14.31 to
obtain on rearrangement

RT ln K   3 1nChC  nDhD  nAhA  nBhB2  T 1nC s °C  nD s °D  nAs °A  nBs °B2 4
                                                                                                              (14.41)

Each of the specific enthalpies and entropies in this equation depends on temperature alone.
Differentiating with respect to temperature

RT    d ln K     R  ln  K         c  nC  a  d hC    T  d s °C b                    nD  a   d hD    T  d s °D b
        dT                                  dT         dT                                  dT         dT

                                  nA  a  d hA       T  d s °A b                    nB  a  d hB    T   d s °B b d
                                         dT            dT                                 dT          dT

                               1nC s °C  nDs °D  nAs °A  nBs °B2

From the definition of s°(T ) (Eq. 6.20), we have ds°dT  cpT. Moreover, dhdT  cp.

Accordingly, each of the underlined terms in the above equation vanishes identically, leaving

      RT      d  ln K      R  ln  K      1nCs °C       nDs °D                      nAs °A    nBs °B2              (14.42)
                 dT
700 Chapter 14 Chemical and Phase Equilibrium

                      Using Eq. 14.41 to evaluate the second term on the left and simplifying the resulting ex-
                      pression, Eq. 14.42 becomes

                                               d ln K    1nC hC      nD hD  nAhA    nB hB2  (14.43a)
                                                 dT                       RT 2

                      or, expressed more concisely

van't Hoff equation                                          d   ln K    ˘H                 (14.43b)
                                                                 dT      RT 2

                      which is the van't Hoff equation.
                         In Eq. 14.43b, H is the enthalpy of reaction at temperature T. The van't Hoff equation

                      shows that when H is negative (exothermic reaction), K decreases with temperature, whereas
                      for H positive (endothermic reaction), K increases with temperature.

                         The enthalpy of reaction H is often very nearly constant over a rather wide interval of

                      temperature. In such cases, Eq. 14.43b can be integrated to yield

                                                       ln K2   ˘H a 1  1 b                  (14.44)
                                                         K1            R T2 T1

                      where K1 and K2 denote the equilibrium constants at temperatures T1 and T2, respectively.
                      This equation shows that ln K is linear in 1T. Accordingly, plots of ln K versus 1T can be
                      used to determine H from experimental equilibrium composition data. Alternatively, the

                      equilibrium constant can be determined using enthalpy data.

                       14.4.3 Ionization

                      The methods developed for determining the equilibrium composition of a reactive ideal gas
                      mixture can be applied to systems involving ionized gases, also known as plasmas. In pre-
                      vious sections we considered the chemical equilibrium of systems where dissociation is a
                      factor. For example, the dissociation reaction of diatomic nitrogen

                                                                 N2  S  2N
                                                                     d

                      can occur at elevated temperatures. At still higher temperatures, ionization may take place
                      according to

                                                             N   S   N      e               (14.45)
                                                                 d

                      That is, a nitrogen atom loses an electron, yielding a singly ionized nitrogen atom N and a
                      free electron e. Further heating can result in the loss of additional electrons until all elec-
                      trons have been removed from the atom.

                         For some cases of practical interest, it is reasonable to think of the neutral atoms,
                      positive ions, and electrons as forming an ideal gas mixture. With this idealization, ion-
                      ization equilibrium can be treated in the same manner as the chemical equilibrium of re-
                      acting ideal gas mixtures. The change in the Gibbs function for the equilibrium ioniza-
                      tion reaction required to evaluate the ionization-equilibrium constant can be calculated as
                      a function of temperature by using the procedures of statistical thermodynamics. In
                      general, the extent of ionization increases as the temperature is raised and the pressure is
                      lowered.

                         Example 14.8 illustrates the analysis of ionization equilibrium.
                                                 14.4 Further Examples of the Use of the Equilibrium Constant 701

E X A M P L E 1 4 . 8 Considering Ionization Equilibrium

Consider an equilibrium mixture at 2000K consisting of Cs, Cs, and e, where Cs denotes neutral cesium atoms, Cs singly
ionized cesium ions, and e free electrons. The ionization-equilibrium constant at this temperature for

                                                 Cs  S  Cs         e
                                                     d

is K  15.63. Determine the pressure, in atmospheres, if the ionization of Cs is 95% complete, and plot percent completion
of ionization versus pressure ranging from 0 to 10 atm.

SOLUTION

Known: An equilibrium mixture of Cs, Cs, e is at 2000K. The value of the equilibrium constant at this temperature is
known.

Find: Determine the pressure of the mixture if the ionization of Cs is 95% complete. Plot percent completion versus pressure.

Assumption: Equilibrium can be treated in this case using ideal gas mixture equilibrium considerations.
Analysis: The ionization of cesium to form a mixture of Cs, Cs, and e is described by

                                                        Cs S 11  z2Cs  z Cs  ze

where z denotes the extent of ionization, ranging from 0 to 1. The total number of moles of mixture n is

                                 n  11  z2  z  z  1  z

At equilibrium, we have Cs S d Cs  e, so Eq. 14.35 takes the form

                                  1z2 1z2     ppref        111               z2      p
                                 11  z2                                       z2b  ab
                     K                     c  11  z2    d             a
                                                                       1            pref

Solving for the ratio ppref and introducing the known value of K

                                            p                  a1      z  2
                                           pref                    z2
                                                     115.632                 b

For pref  1 atm and z  0.95 (95%), p  1.69 atm. Using an equation-solver and plotting package, the following plot can
be constructed:

       100

       95

       90

z (%)  85

       80

       75

       70   0  2  4           6               8            10

                     p (atm)

                                                                    Figure E14.8

    Figure E14.8 shows that ionization tends to occur to a lesser extent as pressure is raised. Ionization also tends to occur to
a greater extent as temperature is raised at fixed pressure.
702 Chapter 14 Chemical and Phase Equilibrium

 14.4.4 Simultaneous Reactions

Let us return to the discussion of Sec. 14.2 and consider the possibility of more than one re-
action among the substances present within a system. For the present application, the closed
system is assumed to contain a mixture of eight components A, B, C, D, E, L, M, and N,
subject to two independent reactions

                                               112 nAA  nBB dS nCC  nDD            (14.24)
                                               122 nAżA  nLL Sd nMM  nNN           (14.46)

As in Sec. 14.2, component E is inert. Also, note that component A has been taken as com-
mon to both reactions but with a possibly different stoichiometric coefficient (nAż is not nec-
essarily equal to nA).

   The stoichiometric coefficients of the above equations do not correspond to the numbers
of moles of the respective components present within the system, but changes in the amounts
of the components are related to the stoichiometric coefficients by

                                               dnA  dnB  dnC  dnD                  (14.25a)
                                               nA   nB        nC nD

following from Eq. 14.24, and

                                               dnA  dnL  dnM  dnN                  (14.47a)
                                               nAż  nL        nM nN

following from Eq. 14.46. Introducing a proportionality factor de1, Eqs. 14.25a may be rep-
resented by

                                               dnA  nA de1,   dnB  nB de1          (14.25b)
                                               dnC  nC de1,   dnD  nD de1

Similarly, with the proportionality factor de2, Eqs. 14.47a may be represented by

                                               dnA  nAż de2,  dnL  nL de2          (14.47b)
                                               dnM  nM de2,   dnN  nN de2

Component A is involved in both reactions, so the total change in A is given by

                                        dnA  nA de1  nAż de2                       (14.48)

Also, we have dnE  0 because component E is inert.
   For the system under present consideration, Eq. 14.10 is

                         dG 4 T,p  mA dnA  mB dnB  mC dnC  mD dnD                  (14.49)
                                     mE dnE  mL dnL  mM dnM  mN dnN

Introducing the above expressions giving the changes in the n's, this becomes

dG 4 T,p  1nAmA  nBmB  nCmC  nDmD2 de1                                             (14.50)
            1nAżmA  nLmL  nMmM  nNmN2 de2

Since the two reactions are independent, de1 and de2 can be independently varied. Accord-
ingly, when dG]T,p  0, the terms in parentheses must be zero and two equations of reaction

equilibrium result, one corresponding to each of the foregoing reactions

                                               nAmA  nBmB  nCmC  nDmD              (14.26b)
                                               nAżmA  nLmL  nMmM  nNmN              (14.51)
                                                                       14.4 Further Examples of the Use of the Equilibrium Constant 703

   The first of these equations is exactly the same as that obtained in Sec. 14.2. For the case
of reacting ideal gas mixtures, this equation can be expressed as

                             a  ˘G° b        ln  c  y   nC  y  nD  a  p nCnDnAnB          d                         (14.52)
                                RT 1                y   C      D          b

                                                        nA  y  nB     pref
                                                        A      B

Similarly, Eq. 14.51 can be expressed as

                             a  ˘G°b         ln  c  y  nM   y  nN    p nM  nN  nAż  nL    d                         (14.53)
                                 RT 2               y  M       N   ab

                                                       y nAż   nL   pref
                                                               L
                                                       A

In each of these equations, the G term is evaluated as the change in Gibbs function for the
respective reaction, regarding each reactant and product as separate at temperature T and a
pressure of 1 atm.

   From Eq. 14.52 follows the equilibrium constant

                                K1        y  nC  y  nD    p nCnDnAnB                                                (14.54)
                                             C      D   ab

                                          y  nA  y  nB   pref
                                             A      B

and from Eq. 14.53 follows

                                K2        y  nM  y  nN    p nM  nN  nAż  nL                                         (14.55)
                                             M      N   ab

                                          y y nAż nL     pref
                                             AL

   The equilibrium constants K1 and K2 can be determined from Table A-27 or a similar com-
pilation. The mole fractions appearing in these expressions must be evaluated by consider-

ing all the substances present within the system, including the inert substance E. Each mole
fraction has the form yi  nin, where ni is the amount of component i in the equilibrium
mixture and

                   n  nA  nB  nC  nD  nE  nL  nM  nN                                                                (14.56)

The n's appearing in Eq. 14.56 can be expressed in terms of two unknown variables through
application of the conservation of mass principle to the various chemical species present.
Accordingly, for a specified temperature and pressure, Eqs. 14.54 and 14.55 give two
equations in two unknowns. The composition of the system at equilibrium can be
determined by solving these equations simultaneously. This procedure is illustrated by
Example 14.9.

   The procedure discussed in this section can be extended to systems involving several
simultaneous independent reactions. The number of simultaneous equilibrium constant ex-
pressions that results equals the number of independent reactions. As these equations are non-
linear and require simultaneous solution, the use of a computer is usually required.

E X A M P L E 1 4 . 9 Considering Equilibrium with Simultaneous Reactions

As  a  result  of  heating,  a  system  consisting  initially      of  1  kmol  of  CO2,  1  kmol  of  O2,  and  1  kmol  of  N2  forms  an  equilibrium
                                                                                          2                      2

mixture of CO2, CO, O2, N2, and NO at 3000 K, 1 atm. Determine the composition of the equilibrium mixture.

SOLUTION

Known: A system consisting of specified amounts of CO2, O2, and N2 is heated to 3000 K, 1 atm, forming an equilibrium
mixture of CO2, CO, O2, N2, and NO.
704 Chapter 14 Chemical and Phase Equilibrium

  Find: Determine the equilibrium composition.

  Assumption: The final mixture is an equilibrium mixture of ideal gases.

  Analysis: The overall reaction has the form

                                            1 CO2           1  O2           12N2  S     a CO        bNO       c CO2         d O2     eN2
                                                            2

  Applying conservation of mass to carbon, oxygen, and nitrogen, the five unknown coefficients can be expressed in terms of
  any two of the coefficients. Selecting a and b as the unknowns, the following balanced equation results:

                     1 CO2           1  O2        12N2   S        a CO        bNO             11    a2 CO2      1     11    a     b2 O2     1  1  1    b2N2
                                     2                                                                          2                           2

  The total number of moles n in the mixture formed by the products is

                                            n        a         b        11        a2       1  11    a    b2     1  1  1     b2    4      a
                                                                                           2                    2                    2

      At equilibrium, two independent reactions relate the components of the product mixture:

  1.  CO2  S  CO     1  O2
           d         2

  2.  21O2  12N2  S  NO
                  d

  For the first of these reactions, the form taken by the equilibrium constant when p  1 atm is

                                            a  3  1  11     a           b2  4 12           1        1  12  1         a 1  a  b 12
                                                  2                                                                1aa 4a b
                               K1                                                 c 14  a22 d                 
                                                         11  a2

  Similarly, the equilibrium constant for the second of the reactions is

                                                         b                                         1        1  1 2  1 2                  2b
                                                                                                                            3 11  a  b2 11  b2 412
                     K2     3  1  1  1      a        b2  4  1  2  3  1  11    b2  4 12  c  14      a22   d                
                               2                                     2

      At 3000 K, Table A-27 provides log10K1  0.485 and log10K2  0.913, giving K1  0.3273 and K2  0.1222.
  Accordingly, the two equations that must be solved simultaneously for the two unknowns a and b are

                               0.3273                    a        a1    a         b    1   2        0.1222                         2b
                                                                        4a                                                       b2 11
                                                     1      a                         b    ,                    3 11        a               b2 4 12

  The solution is a  0.3745, b  0.0675, as can be verified. The composition of the equilibrium mixture, in kmol per kmol
  of CO2 present initially, is then 0.3745CO, 0.0675NO, 0.6255CO2, 0.6535O2, 0.4663N2.

   If high enough temperatures are attained, nitrogen can combine with oxygen to form components such as nitric oxide.

      Even trace amounts of oxides of nitrogen in products of combustion can be a source of air pollution.

                                     PHASE EQUILIBRIUM

                                  In this part of the chapter the equilibrium condition dG]T,p  0 introduced in Sec. 14.1
                                  is used to study the equilibrium of multicomponent, multiphase, nonreacting systems. The
                                  discussion begins with the elementary case of equilibrium between two phases of a pure
                                  substance and then turns to the general case of several components present in several
                                  phases.
                                                    14.5 Equilibrium Between Two Phases of a Pure Substance 705

14.5 Equilibrium Between Two Phases of a
          Pure Substance

Consider the case of a system consisting of two phases of a pure substance at equilibrium.
Since the system is at equilibrium, each phase is at the same temperature and pressure. The
Gibbs function for the system is

                            G  nżgż1T, p2  n­g­1T, p2                         (14.57)

where the primes  and  denote phases 1 and 2, respectively.
   Forming the differential of G at fixed T and p

                            dG 4 T, p  gż dnż  g­ dn­                         (14.58)

Since the total amount of the pure substance remains constant, an increase in the amount
present in one of the phases must be compensated by an equivalent decrease in the amount
present in the other phase. Thus, we have dn  dn, and Eq. 14.58 becomes

                                          dG 4 T,p  1gż  g­ 2 dnż
At equilibrium, dG]T,p  0, so

                                         gż  g­                               (14.59)

At equilibrium, the molar Gibbs functions of the phases are equal.

CLAPEYRON EQUATION. Equation 14.59 can be used to derive the Clapeyron equation, ob-

tained by other means in Sec. 11.4. For two phases at equilibrium, variations in pressure are
uniquely related to variations in temperature: p  psat(T ); thus, differentiation of Eq. 14.59
with respect to temperature gives

                     0gż       0gż  dpsat    0g­       0g­             dpsat
                         b  b                    b  b
                     0T p 0p T dT 0T p 0p T dT

With Eqs. 11.30 and 11.31, this becomes

                            sż  vż dpsat  s­  v­ dpsat
                                    dT                             dT

Or on rearrangement

                                    dpsat  s­  sż
                                     dT v­  vż

This can be expressed alternatively by noting that, with g  h  T s, Eq. 14.59 becomes

                            hż  T sż  h­  T s­

or

                            s­  sż  h­  hż                                    (14.60)
                                            T

Combining results, the Clapeyron equation is obtained

                                           dpsat  1 a h­  hż b                (14.61) Clapeyron equation
                                            dT T v­  vż
Applications of the Clapeyron equation are provided in Chap. 11.
706 Chapter 14 Chemical and Phase Equilibrium

                       A special form of Eq. 14.61 for a system at equilibrium consisting of a liquid or solid

                    phase and a vapor phase can be obtained simply. If the specific volume of the liquid or solid,
                    vż, is negligible compared with the specific volume of the vapor, v­, and the vapor can be

                    treated as an ideal gas, v­  R Tpsat, Eq. 14.61 becomes

                                                    dpsat    h­  hż
                                                     dT
                                                              RT 2 psat

                    or

Clausius­Clapeyron                               d  ln psat    h­  hż           (14.62)
equation                                            dT           RT 2

                    which is the Clausius­Clapeyron equation. The similarity in form of Eq. 14.62 and the van't
                    Hoff equation, Eq. 14.43b, may be noted. The van't Hoff equation for chemical equilibrium
                    is the counterpart of the Clausius­Clapeyron equation for phase equilibrium.

                    14.6 Equilibrium of Multicomponent,
                               Multiphase Systems

                    The equilibrium of systems that may involve several phases, each having a number of compo-
                    nents present, is considered in this section. The principal result is the Gibbs phase rule, which
                    summarizes important limitations on multicomponent, multiphase systems at equilibrium.

                     14.6.1 Chemical Potential and Phase Equilibrium

                    Figure 14.1 shows a system consisting of two components A and B in two phases 1 and 2
                    that are at the same temperature and pressure. Applying Eq. 14.10 to each of the phases

                                                 dGż 4 T,p  mAż dnAż  mBż dnBż  (14.63)
                                                 dG­ 4 T,p  mA­ dnA­  mB­ dnB­

                    where as before the primes identify the two phases.
                       When matter is transferred between the two phases in the absence of chemical reaction,

                    the total amounts of A and B must remain constant. Thus, the increase in the amount present
                    in one of the phases must be compensated by an equivalent decrease in the amount present
                    in the other phase. That is

                                                 dnA­  dnAż , dnB­  dnBż        (14.64)

                    Phase 1
                        Component A, n´A, µ ´A
                        Component B, n´B, µ´B

                    Phase 2                       Figure 14.1 System consisting of two components in two
                        Component A, n´´A, µ´´A  phases.
                        Component B, n´´B, µ´´B
              14.6 Equilibrium of Multicomponent, Multiphase Systems 707

With Eqs. 14.63 and 14.64, the change in the Gibbs function for the system is

              dG 4 T,p  dGż 4 T,p  dG­ 4 T,p                                   (14.65)
                       1mAż  m­A2 dnAż  1mBż  m­B2 dnBż

Since nAż and nBż can be varied independently, it follows that when dG]T,p  0, the terms in
parentheses are zero, resulting in

              mAż  mA­ and mBż  mB­                                            (14.66)

At equilibrium, the chemical potential of each component is the same in each phase.
   The significance of the chemical potential for phase equilibrium can be brought out sim-

ply by reconsidering the system of Fig. 14.1 in the special case when the chemical potential
of component B is the same in both phases: mBż  m­B. With this constraint, Eq. 14.65 reduces
to

                                         dG 4 T,p  1mAż  mA­2 dnAż

Any spontaneous process of the system taking place at a fixed temperature and pressure must
be such that the Gibbs function decreases: dG]T,p  0. Thus, with the above expression we
have

              1mAż  m­A2 dnAż 6 0

Accordingly,

 when the chemical potential of A is greater in phase 1 than in phase 2 (mAż 7 m­A), it
   follows that dnAż 6 0. That is, substance A passes from phase 1 to phase 2.

 when the chemical potential of A is greater in phase 2 than in phase 1 (m­A 7 mAż ), it
   follows that dnAż 7 0. That is, substance A passes from phase 2 to phase 1.

At equilibrium, the chemical potentials are equal (mAż  m­A), and there is no net transfer of
A between the phases.

   With this reasoning, we see that the chemical potential can be regarded as a measure of
the escaping tendency of a component. If the chemical potential of a component is not the
same in each phase, there will be a tendency for that component to pass from the phase hav-
ing the higher chemical potential for that component to the phase having the lower chemi-
cal potential. When the chemical potential is the same in both phases, there is no tendency
for a net transfer to occur from one phase to the other.

   In Example 14.10, we apply phase equilibrium principles to provide a rationale for the
model introduced in Sec. 12.5.3 for moist air in contact with liquid water.

E X A M P L E 1 4 . 1 0 Equilibrium of Moist Air in Contact with Liquid Water

A closed system at a temperature of 20C and a pressure of 1 bar consists of a pure liquid water phase in equilibrium with a
vapor phase composed of water vapor and dry air. Determine the departure, in percent, of the partial pressure of the water
vapor from the saturation pressure of water at 20C.

SOLUTION
Known: A phase of liquid water only is in equilibrium with moist air at 20C and 1 bar.
Find: Determine the percentage departure of the partial pressure of the water vapor in the moist air from the saturation
pressure of water at 20C.
708 Chapter 14 Chemical and Phase Equilibrium

  Schematic and Given Data:
                                      T

      Gas phase of                       p = 1 bar            Sat. vapor                       pv            Assumptions:
      water vapor                                Sat. liquid                        psat
      and dry air                                                                                            1. The gas phase can be modeled as an ideal gas
                                                                          g                                  mixture.
                    20C                  f                                          State of                 2. The liquid phase is pure water only.
                                                                                   the water
                                          State of                                   vapor
                                         the liquid

      Liquid water                                                                              v
                                                                                                          Figure E14.10

  Analysis: For phase equilibrium, the chemical potential of the water must have the same value in both phases: 1  v,
  where 1 and v denote, respectively, the chemical potentials of the pure liquid water in the liquid phase and the water vapor
  in the vapor phase.

      The chemical potential 1 is the Gibbs function per mole of pure liquid water (Eq. 14.12)

                                                                      m1  g 1T, p2

  Since the vapor phase is assumed to form an ideal gas mixture, the chemical potential v equals the Gibbs function per mole
  evaluated at temperature T and the partial pressure pv of the water vapor (Eq. 14.16)

                                                                      mv  g 1T, pv2
      For phase equilibrium, 1  v, or

                                                                   g 1T, pv2  g 1T, p2

  With g  h  T s, this can be expressed alternatively as

                                                   h 1T, pv2  T s 1T, pv2  h 1T, p2  T s 1T, p2

      The water vapor is modeled as an ideal gas. Thus, the enthalpy is given closely by the saturated vapor value at tempera-
  ture T

                                                                      h 1T, pv2  hg

  Furthermore, with Eq. 6.21b, the difference between the specific entropy of the water vapor and the specific entropy at the
  corresponding saturated vapor state is

                                                              s 1T,       pv2    sg 1T  2     R    ln  pv
                                                                                                       psat

  or

                                                              s  1T,      pv2    sg  1T    2    R  ln  pv
                                                                                                       psat

  where psat is the saturation pressure at temperature T.
      With Eq. 3.13, the enthalpy of the liquid is closely

                                                             h 1T, p2  hf  vf 1 p  psat2
  where vf and hf are the saturated liquid specific volume and enthalpy at temperature T. Furthermore, with Eq. 6.7

                                                                     s 1T, p2  sf 1T 2

  where sf is the saturated liquid specific entropy at temperature T.
                                                            14.6 Equilibrium of Multicomponent, Multiphase Systems 709

      Collecting the foregoing expressions, we have

                    hg      T   asg                  R  ln  pv b       hf     vf 1 p    psat2    T  sf
                                                            psat

  or

                    RT  ln  pv       vf 1 p                 psat2      3 1hg     hf2    T 1sg    sf2 4
                            psat

  The underlined term vanishes by Eq. 14.60, leaving

                 ln pv  vf 1 p  psat2                              or         pv  exp vf 1 p  psat2
                    psat             RT                                    psat                RT

  With data from Table A-2 at 20C, vf  1.0018  103 m3/kg and psat  0.0239 bar, we have

           vf 1 p  psat2          1.0018                    103 m3/kg 11              0.02392    105 N/m2
                RT                                            8314 N # m
                                                            a18.02 kg # K b 1293.15 K2

                                 7.23  104

  Finally

                                pv  exp 17.23  1042  1.00072
                                psat

      When expressed as a percentage, the departure of pv from psat is

                    a pv  psat b 11002  11.00073  12 11002  0.072%
                          psat

   For phase equilibrium, there would be a small, but finite, concentration of air in the liquid water phase. However, this

      small amount of dissolved air is ignored in the present development.

   The departure of pv from psat is negligible at the specified conditions. This suggests that at normal temperatures and pressures

      the equilibrium between the liquid water phase and the water vapor is not significantly disturbed by the presence of the

      dry air. Accordingly, the partial pressure of the water vapor can be taken as equal to the saturation pressure of the water

      at the system temperature. This model, introduced in Sec. 12.5.3, is used extensively in Chap. 12.

 14.6.2 Gibbs Phase Rule

The requirement for equilibrium of a system consisting of two components and two phases,
given by Eqs. 14.66, can be extended with similar reasoning to nonreacting multicomponent,
multiphase systems. At equilibrium, the chemical potential of each component must be the
same in all phases. For the case of N components that are present in P phases we have, there-
fore, the following set of N(P  1) equations:

                                                      P1

                                     w

              m11  m12  m13  # # #  m1P
              m12  m22  m23  # # #  mP2

           N  e  #                                                                                      (14.67)
                 #

                 #

              mN1  mN2  mN3  # # #  mPN

where mji denotes the chemical potential of the ith component in the jth phase. This set of
equations provides the basis for the Gibbs phase rule, which allows the determination of the
710 Chapter 14 Chemical and Phase Equilibrium

degrees of freedom    number of independent intensive properties that may be arbitrarily specified in order to fix
                      the intensive state of the system. The number of independent intensive properties is called
                      the degrees of freedom (or the variance).

                         Since the chemical potential is an intensive property, its value depends on the relative
                      proportions of the components present and not on the amounts of the components. In other
                      words, in a given phase involving N components at temperature T and pressure p, the chem-
                      ical potential is determined by the mole fractions of the components present and not the re-
                      spective n's. However, as the mole fractions add to unity, at most N  1 of the mole fractions
                      can be independent. Thus, for a system involving N components, there are at most N  1
                      independently variable mole fractions for each phase. For P phases, therefore, there are at
                      most P(N  1) independently variable mole fractions. In addition, the temperature and pres-
                      sure, which are the same in each phase, are two further intensive properties, giving a max-
                      imum of P(N  1)  2 independently variable intensive properties for the system. But
                      because of the N(P  1) equilibrium conditions represented by Eqs. 14.67 among these
                      properties, the number of intensive properties that are freely variable, the degrees of free-
                      dom F, is

Gibbs phase rule      F  3P1N  12  24  N1P  12  2  N  P  (14.68)

                      which is the Gibbs phase rule.
                         In Eq. 14.68, F is the number of intensive properties that may be arbitrarily specified and

                      that must be specified to fix the intensive state of a nonreacting system at equilibrium.
                       for example... let us apply the Gibbs phase rule to a liquid solution consisting of
                      water and ammonia such as considered in the discussion of absorption refrigeration (Sec. 10.5).
                      This solution involves two components and a single phase: N  2 and P  1. Equation 14.68
                      then gives F  3, so the intensive state is fixed by giving the values of three intensive properties,
                      such as temperature, pressure, and the ammonia (or water) mole fraction. 

                         The phase rule summarizes important limitations on various types of systems. For ex-
                      ample, for a system involving a single component such as water, N  1 and Eq. 14.68
                      becomes

                                               F3P       (14.69)

                       The minimum number of phases is one, corresponding to P  1. For this case,
                         Eq. 14.69 gives F  2. That is, two intensive properties must be specified to fix the
                         intensive state of the system. This requirement is familiar from our use of the steam
                         tables and similar property tables. To obtain properties of superheated vapor, say, from
                         such tables requires that we give values for any two of the tabulated properties, for
                         example, T and p.

                       When two phases are present in a system involving a single component, N  1 and
                         P  2. Equation 14.69 then gives F  1. That is, the intensive state is determined by a
                         single intensive property value. For example, the intensive states of the separate phases
                         of an equilibrium mixture of liquid water and water vapor are completely determined
                         by specifying the temperature.

                       The minimum allowable value for the degrees of freedom is zero: F  0. For a single-
                         component system, Eq. 14.69 shows that this corresponds to P  3, a three-phase
                         system. Thus, three is the maximum number of different phases of a pure component
                         that can coexist in equilibrium. Since there are no degrees of freedom, both temperature
                         and pressure are fixed at equilibrium. For example, there is only a single temperature
                         0.01C and a single pressure 0.6113 kPa for which ice, liquid water, and water vapor
                         are in equilibrium.
                                                                                14.6 Equilibrium of Multicomponent, Multiphase Systems 711

   The phase rule given here must be modified for application to systems in which chemical
reactions occur. Furthermore, the system of equations, Eqs. 14.67, giving the requirements for
phase equilibrium at a specified temperature and pressure can be expressed alternatively in
terms of partial molal Gibbs functions, fugacities, and activities, all of which are introduced in
Sec. 11.9. To use any such expression to determine the equilibrium composition of the differ-
ent phases present within a system at equilibrium requires a model for each phase that allows
the relevant quantities--the chemical potentials, fugacities, and so on--to be evaluated for the
components present in terms of system properties that can be determined. For example, a gas
phase might be modeled as an ideal gas mixture or, at higher pressures, as an ideal solution.

Chapter Summary and Study Guide

In this chapter, we have studied chemical equilibrium and                      apply the equilibrium constant relationship, Eq. 14.35, to
phase equilibrium. The chapter opens by developing criteria                      determine the third quantity when any two of tempera-
for equilibrium and introducing the chemical potential. In the                   ture, pressure, and equilibrium composition of an ideal
second part of the chapter, we study the chemical equilibrium                    gas mixture are known. Special cases include applica-
of ideal gas mixtures using the equilibrium constant concept.                    tions with simultaneous reactions and systems involving
We also utilize the energy balance and determine the equi-                       ionized gases.
librium flame temperature as an application. The final part of
the chapter concerns phase equilibrium, including multicom-                    use chemical equilibrium concepts with the energy bal-
ponent, multiphase systems and the Gibbs phase rule.                             ance, including determination of the equilibrium flame
                                                                                 temperature.
   The following list provides a study guide for this chapter.
When your study of the text and end-of-chapter exercises has                   apply Eq. 14.43b, the van't Hoff equation, to determine
been completed, you should be able to                                            the enthalpy of reaction when the equilibrium constant is
                                                                                 known, and conversely.
 write out the meaning of the terms listed in the margin
   throughout the chapter and understand each of the related                   apply the Gibbs phase rule, Eq. 14.68.
   concepts. The subset of key concepts listed below is
   particularly important.

Key Engineering Concepts

Gibbs function p. 719                equation of reaction                     equilibrium                    Gibbs phase rule p. 749
equilibrium                             equilibrium p. 725                       constant p. 727

   criterion p. 720
chemical

   potential p. 721

Exercises: Things Engineers Think About

1. Why is using the Gibbs function advantageous when study-                   6.  For  CO2  H2  S  CO  H2O,  how  does  pressure  affect  the
ing chemical and phase equilibrium?                                                             d

                                                                              equilibrium composition?

2. For Eq. 14.6 to apply at equilibrium, must a system attain                 7. For each of the reactions listed in Table A-27, the value of log10K
equilibrium at fixed T and p?                                                 increases with increasing temperature. What does this imply?

3. Show that (dA)T,V  0 is a valid equilibrium criterion, where               8. For each of the reactions listed in Table A-27, the value of the
A  U  TS is the Helmholtz function.                                           equilibrium constant K at 298 K is relatively small. What does
                                                                              this imply?
4.  A  mixture  of  1  kmol  of  CO  and  1  kmol  of  O2  is  held  at  am-
                                          2

bient temperature and pressure. After 100 hours only an                       9. If a system initially containing CO2 and H2O were held at fixed
                                                                              T, p, list chemical species that might be present at equilibrium.
insignificant amount of CO2 has formed. Why?

5. Why might oxygen contained in an iron tank be treated as                   10. Using Eq. 14.12 together with phase equilibrium considera-
                                                                              tions, suggest how the chemical potential of a mixture compo-
inert in a thermodynamic analysis even though iron oxidizes in                nent could be evaluated.

the presence of oxygen?
712 Chapter 14 Chemical and Phase Equilibrium

11. Note 1 of Example 14.10 refers to the small amount of air                12. Water can exist in a number of different solid phases. Can
that would be dissolved in the liquid phase. For equilibrium, what           liquid water, water vapor, and two phases of ice exist in
must be true of the chemical potentials of air in the liquid and             equilibrium?
gas phases?

Problems: Developing Engineering Skills

Working with the Equilibrium Constant                                        (a) Show that K1  K2K3.
                                                                             (b) Evaluate log10K1 at 298 K, 1 atm using the expression from
14.1 Determine the change in the Gibbs function G at 25C,
   in kJ/kmol, for the reaction                                                   part (a), together with log10K data from Table A-27.
                                                                             (c) Check the value for log10K1 obtained in part (b) by apply-
               CH4 1g2      2O2       S  CO2        2H2O 1g2
                                      d                                          ing Eq. 14.31 to reaction 1.

using                                                                        14.10 Evaluate the equilibrium constant at 2000 K for

(a) Gibbs function of formation data.                                        CH4  H2O dS 3H2  CO. At 2000 K, log10K  7.469 for
(b) enthalpy of formation and absolute entropy data.
                                                                             C    12O2  S  CO,  and  log10K    3.408   for      C    2H2  S  CH4.
                                                                                        d                                                 d

14.2 Calculate the equilibrium constant, expressed as log10K,                14.11 For each of the following dissociation reactions, deter-
   for CO2 Sd CO  21O2 at (a) 500 K, (b) 1800R. Compare with                    mine the equilibrium compositions:

   values from Table A-27.                                                   (a) One kmol of N2O4 dissociates to form an equilibrium ideal

14.3 Calculate the equilibrium constant, expressed as log10K,                   gas mixture of N2O4 and NO2 at 25C, 2 atm. For

for    the  water-gas    reaction     CO       H2O(g)  S      CO2    H2  at     N2O4 S d 2NO2, G  5400 kJ/kmol at 25C.
                                                       d

(a) 298 K, (b) 1000 K. Compare with values from Table A-27.                  (b) One kmol of CH4 dissociates to form an equilibrium ideal

14.4 Calculate the equilibrium constant, expressed as log10K,                   gas mixture of CH4, H2, and C at 1000 K, 5 atm. For

for    H2O  S  H2     21O2  at   (a)  298  K,  (b)  2000K.    Compare  with     C       2H2  S  CH4,  log10K    1.011  at   1000   K.
            d                                                                                d

values from Table A-27.                                                      14.12 The following exercises involve oxides of nitrogen:

14.5 Using data from Table A-27, determine log10K at 2500 K                  (a) One kmol of N2O4 dissociates at 25C, 1 atm to form an
   for                                                                            equilibrium ideal gas mixture of N2O4 and NO2 in which
                                                                                  the amount of N2O4 present is 0.8154 kmol. Determine the
(a)    H2O  S  H2  12O2.                                                          amount of N2O4 that would be present in an equilibrium
            d                                                                     mixture at 25C, 0.5 atm.

(b)    H2  12O2    S  H2O.
                   d

(c)    2H2O  S    2H2       O2.
             d

14.6 In Table A-27, log10K is nearly linear in 1T: log10K                    (b) A gaseous mixture consisting of 1 kmol of NO, 10 kmol
   C1  C2T, where C1 and C2 are constants. For selected
                                                                                of O2, and 40 kmol of N2 reacts to form an equilibrium
   reactions listed in the table
                                                                                ideal gas mixture of NO2, NO, and O2 at 500 K, 0.1 atm.

(a) verify this by plotting log10K versus 1T temperature rang-                  Determine the composition of the equilibrium mixture. For
     ing from 2100 to 2500 K.
                                                                                NO      12O2  S  NO2,  K      120  at  500  K.
(b) evaluate C1 and C2 for any pair of adjacent table entries in                              d
     the temperature range of part (a).
                                                                             (c) An equimolar mixture of O2 and N2 reacts to form an equi-

                                                                                librium ideal gas mixture of O2, N2, and NO. Plot the mole

                                                                                fraction of NO in the equilibrium mixture versus equilib-

14.7 Determine the relationship between the ideal gas equilib-                  rium temperature ranging from 1200 to 2000 K.
   rium constants K1 and K2 for the following two alternative ways
   of expressing the ammonia synthesis reaction:                             Why are oxides of nitrogen of concern?

      1. 12N2  32H2 Sd NH3                                                   14.13 One kmol of CO2 dissociates to form an equilibrium
      2. N2  3H2 Sd 2NH3                                                        ideal gas mixture of CO2, CO, and O2 at temperature T and
                                                                                pressure p.
14.8 Consider the reactions
                                                                             (a) For T  3000 K, plot the amount of CO present, in kmol,
      1. CO  H2O dS H2  CO2                                                       versus pressure for 1  p  10 atm.
      2. 2CO2 dS 2CO  O2
      3. 2H2O Sd 2H2  O2                                                     (b) For p  1 atm, plot the amount of CO present, in kmol,
   Show that K1  (K3K2)12.                                                        versus temperature for 2000  T  3500 K.

14.9 Consider the reactions                                                  14.14 One kgmol of H2O dissociates to form an equilibrium
                                                                                ideal gas mixture of H2O, H2, and O2 at temperature T and
1.     CO2  H2        S  CO  H2O                                                pressure p.
                      d

2.     CO2     S  CO  21O2                                                   (a) For T  3000K, plot the amount of H2 present, in kgmol,
               d                                                                  versus pressure ranging from 1 to 10 atm.

3.     H2O     S  H2     1  O2
               d         2
                                                                   Problems: Developing Engineering Skills 713

   (b) For p  1 atm, plot the amount of H2 present, in kgmol,      14.25 A gaseous mixture with a molar analysis of 20% CO2,
        versus temperature ranging from 2000 to 3500K.                40% CO, and 40% O2 enters a heat exchanger and is heated
                                                                      at constant pressure. An equilibrium mixture of CO2, CO, and
14.15 An equimolar mixture of CO and O2 reacts to form an             O2 exits at 3000 K, 1.5 bar. Determine the molar analysis of
   equilibrium mixture of CO2, CO, and O2 at 3000 K. Determine        the exiting mixture.
   the effect of pressure on the composition of the equilibrium
   mixture. Will lowering the pressure while keeping the tem-      14.26 An ideal gas mixture with the molar analysis 30% CO,
   perature fixed increase or decrease the amount of CO2 pres-        10% CO2, 40% H2O, 20% inert gas enters a reactor operating
   ent? Explain.                                                      at steady state. An equilibrium mixture of CO, CO2, H2O, H2,
                                                                      and the inert gas exits at 1 atm.
14.16 An equimolar mixture of CO and H2O(g) reacts to form
   an equilibrium mixture of CO2, CO, H2O, and H2 at 1727C,           (a) If the equilibrium mixture exits at 1200 K, determine on
   1 atm.                                                                  a molar basis the ratio of the H2 in the equilibrium mix-
                                                                           ture to the H2O in the entering mixture.
   (a) Will lowering the temperature increase or decrease the
        amount of H2 present? Explain.                                (b) If the mole fraction of CO present in the equilibrium mix-
                                                                           ture is 7.5%, determine the temperature of the equilibrium
   (b) Will decreasing the pressure while keeping the tempera-             mixture, in K.
        ture constant increase or decrease the amount of H2 pres-
        ent? Explain.                                              14.27 A mixture of 1 kmol CO and 0.5 kmol O2 in a closed
                                                                      vessel, initially at 1 atm and 300 K, reacts to form an equilib-
14.17 Determine the temperature, in K, at which 9% of diatomic        rium mixture of CO2, CO, and O2 at 2500 K. Determine the
   hydrogen (H2) dissociates into monatomic hydrogen (H) at a         final pressure, in atm.
   pressure of 10 atm. For a greater percentage of H2 at the same
   pressure, would the temperature be higher or lower? Explain.    14.28 Methane burns with 90% of theoretical air to form an
                                                                      equilibrium mixture of CO2, CO, H2O(g), H2, and N2 at 1000 K,
14.18 Two kmol of CO2 dissociate to form an equilibrium mix-          1 atm. Determine the composition of the equilibrium mixture,
   ture of CO2, CO, and O2 in which 1.8 kmol of CO2 is present.       per kmol of mixture.
   Plot the temperature of the equilibrium mixture, in K, versus
   the pressure p for 0.5  p  10 atm.                              14.29 Octane (C8H18) burns with air to form an equilibrium
                                                                      mixture of CO2, H2, CO, H2O(g), and N2 at 1700 K, 1 atm.
14.19 One kmol of H2O(g) dissociates to form an equilibrium           Determine the composition of the products, in kmol per kmol
   mixture of H2O(g), H2, and O2 in which the amount of water         of fuel, for an equivalence ratio of 1.2.
   vapor present is 0.95 kmol. Plot the temperature of the equi-
   librium mixture, in K, versus the pressure p for 1  p           14.30 Acetylene gas (C2H2) at 25C, 1 atm enters a reactor op-
   10 atm.                                                            erating at steady state and burns with 40% excess air entering
                                                                      at 25C, 1 atm, 80% relative humidity. An equilibrium mixture
14.20 A vessel initially containing 1 kmol of H2O(g) and x kmol       of CO2, H2O, O2, NO, and N2 exits at 2200 K, 0.9 atm.
   of N2 forms an equilibrium mixture at 1 atm consisting of          Determine, per kmol of C2H2 entering, the composition of
   H2O(g), H2, O2, and N2 in which 0.5 kmol of H2O(g) is pres-        exiting mixture.
   ent. Plot x versus the temperature T for 3000  T  3600 K.
                                                                   Chemical Equilibrium and the Energy Balance
14.21 A vessel initially containing 1 kmol of CO and 4.76 kmol
   of dry air forms an equilibrium mixture of CO2, CO, O2, and     14.31 Carbon dioxide gas at 25C, 5.1 atm enters a heat ex-
   N2 at 3000 K, 1 atm. Determine the equilibrium composition.        changer operating at steady state. An equilibrium mixture of
                                                                      CO2, CO, and O2 exits at 2527C, 5 atm. Determine, per kmol
14.22 A vessel initially containing 1 kmol of O2, 2 kmol of           of CO2 entering,
   N2, and 1 kmol of Ar forms an equilibrium mixture of O2,
   N2, NO, and Ar at 2727C, 1 atm. Determine the equilibrium          (a) the composition of the exiting mixture.
   composition.                                                       (b) the heat transfer to the gas stream, in kJ.

14.23 One kmol of CO and 0.5 kmol of O2 react to form a               Neglect kinetic and potential energy effects.
   mixture at temperature T and pressure p consisting of CO2,
   CO, and O2. If 0.35 kmol of CO is present in an equilibrium     14.32 Carbon at 25C, 1 atm enters a reactor operating at steady
   mixture when the pressure is 1 atm, determine the amount of        state and burns with oxygen entering at 127C, 1 atm. The
   CO present in an equilibrium mixture at the same temperature       entering streams have equal molar flow rates. An equilibrium
   if the pressure were 10 atm.                                       mixture of CO2, CO, and O2 exits at 2727C, 1 atm. Deter-
                                                                      mine, per kmol of carbon,
14.24 A vessel initially contains 1 kmol of H2 and 4 kmol of
   N2. An equilibrium mixture of H2, H, and N2 forms at 3000 K,       (a) the composition of the exiting mixture.
   1 atm. Determine the equilibrium composition. If the pressure      (b) the heat transfer between the reactor and its surroundings,
   were increased while keeping the temperature fixed, would
   the amount of monatomic hydrogen in the equilibrium mixture             in kJ.
   increase or decrease? Explain.
                                                                      Neglect kinetic and potential energy effects.
714 Chapter 14 Chemical and Phase Equilibrium

14.33 Methane gas at 25C, 1 atm enters a reactor operating at           oretical amount of air entering at 25C, 1 atm. An equilibrium
   steady state and burns with 80% of theoretical air entering at       mixture of CO2, CO, O2, and N2 exits at 1 atm. For selected
   227C, 1 atm. An equilibrium mixture of CO2, CO, H2O(g),              values of x ranging from 1 to 4, determine the temperature of
   H2, and N2 exits at 1427C, 1 atm. Determine, per kmol of             the exiting equilibrium mixture, in K. Kinetic and potential en-
   methane entering,                                                    ergy effects are negligible.

   (a) the composition of the exiting mixture.                       14.42 A mixture consisting of 1 kmol of carbon monoxide
   (b) the heat transfer between the reactor and its surroundings,      (CO), 0.5 kmol of oxygen (O2), and 1.88 kmol of nitrogen (N2),
                                                                        initially at 227C, 1 atm, reacts in a closed, rigid, insulated ves-
        in kJ.                                                          sel, forming an equilibrium mixture of CO2, CO, O2, and N2.
                                                                        Determine the final equilibrium pressure, in atm.
   Neglect kinetic and potential energy effects.
                                                                     14.43 A mixture consisting of 1 kmol of CO and the theoreti-
14.34 Gaseous propane (C3H8) at 25C, 1 atm enters a reactor             cal amount of air, initially at 60C, 1 atm, reacts in a closed,
   operating at steady state and burns with 80% of theoretical air      rigid, insulated vessel to form an equilibrium mixture. An
   entering separately at 25C, 1 atm. An equilibrium mixture of         analysis of the products shows that there are 0.808 kmol of
   CO2, CO, H2O(g), H2, and N2 exits at 1227C, 1 atm. Determine         CO2, 0.192 kmol of CO, and 0.096 kmol of O2 present. The
   the heat transfer between the reactor and its surroundings, in       temperature of the final mixture is measured as 2465C. Check
   kJ per kmol of propane entering. Neglect kinetic and potential       the consistency of these data.
   energy effects.
                                                                     Using the van't Hoff Equation, Ionization
14.35 One kmol of CO2 initially at temperature T and 1 atm is
   heated at constant pressure until a final state is attained con-  14.44 Estimate the enthalpy of reaction at 2000 K, in kJ/kmol,
   sisting of an equilibrium mixture of CO2, CO, and O2 in which
   the amount of CO2 present is 0.422 kmol. Determine the heat       for    CO2  S  CO       12O2  using  the    van't  Hoff  equation  and  equi-
   transfer and the work, each in kJ, if T is (a) 298 K, (b) 400 K.              d

14.36 Hydrogen gas (H2) at 25C, 1 atm enters an insulated re-        librium constant data. Compare with the value obtained for the
   actor operating at steady state and reacts with 250% excess oxy-
   gen entering at 227C, 1 atm. The products of combustion exit      enthalpy of reaction using enthalpy data.
   at 1 atm. Determine the temperature of the products, in K, if
                                                                     14.45 Estimate the enthalpy of reaction at 2000 K, in kJ/kmol,
   (a) combustion is complete.
   (b) an equilibrium mixture of H2O, H2, and O2 exits.              for    H2O  S  H2      21O2,  using  the    van't  Hoff  equation  and  equi-
                                                                                 d
   Kinetic and potential energy effects are negligible.
                                                                     librium constant data. Compare with the value obtained for the
14.37 For each case of Problem 14.45, determine the rate of
   entropy production, in kJ/K per kmol of H2 entering. What can     enthalpy of reaction using enthalpy data.
   be concluded about the possibility of achieving complete
   combustion?                                                       14.46 Estimate the equilibrium constant at 2800 K for
                                                                        CO2 S d CO  12O2 using the equilibrium constant at 2000 K
14.38 Hydrogen (H2) at 25C, 1 atm enters an insulated reac-             from Table A-27, together with the van't Hoff equation and en-
   tor operating at steady state and reacts with 100% of theoret-
   ical air entering at 25C, 1 atm. The products of combustion          thalpy data. Compare with the value for the equilibrium con-
   exit at temperature T and 1 atm. Determine T, in K, if
                                                                        stant obtained from Table A-27.
   (a) combustion is complete.
   (b) an equilibrium mixture of H2O, H2, O2, and N2 exits.          14.47 Estimate the equilibrium constant at 2800 K for the
                                                                        reaction H2O S d H2  12O2 using the equilibrium constant at
14.39 Carbon monoxide at 25C, 1 atm enters an insulated re-             2500 K from Table A-27, together with the van't Hoff equa-
   actor operating at steady state and burns with excess oxygen
   (O2) entering at 25C, 1 atm. The products exit at 2950 K,            tion and enthalpy data. Compare with the value for the equi-
   1 atm as an equilibrium mixture of CO2, CO, and O2.
   Determine the percent excess oxygen. Kinetic and potential en-       librium constant obtained from Table A-27.
   ergy effects are negligible.
                                                                     14.48 At 25C, log10K  8.9 for C  2H2 d S CH4. Assuming
14.40 Methane at 25C, 1 atm enters an insulated reactor op-             that the enthalpy of reaction does not vary much with temper-
   erating at steady state and burns with oxygen entering at 127C,
   1 atm. An equilibrium mixture of CO2, CO, O2, and H2O(g)          ature, estimate the value of log10K at 500C.
   exits at 3250 K, 1 atm. Determine the rate at which oxygen
   enters the reactor, in kmol per kmol of methane. Kinetic and      14.49  If the ionization-equilibrium constants for Cs         S  Cs       e
   potential energy effects are negligible.                                                                                        d

14.41 Methane gas at 25C, 1 atm enters an insulated reactor          at 1600 and 2000 K are K  0.78 and K  15.63, respectively,
   operating at steady state, where it burns with x times the the-
                                                                     estimate the enthalpy of ionization, in kJ/kmol, at 1800 K using

                                                                     the van't Hoff equation.

                                                                     14.50 An equilibrium mixture at 2000 K, 1 atm consists of Cs,
                                                                        Cs, and e. Based on 1 kmol of Cs present initially, determine

                                                                     the percent ionization of cesium. At 2000 K, the ionization-

                                                                     equilibrium      constant  for  Cs   S  Cs         e  is   K    15.63.
                                                                                                          d

                                                                     14.51 At 2000 K and pressure p, 1 kmol of Na ionizes to form
                                                                        an equilibrium mixture of Na, Na, and e in which the amount

                                                                     of Na present is x kmol. Plot the pressure, in atm, versus x for

                                                                     0.2  x  0.3 kmol. At 2000 K, the ionization-equilibrium

                                                                     constant    for  Na  S  Na        e     is  K      0.668.
                                                                                          d
                                                                     Problems: Developing Engineering Skills 715

14.52 At 12,000 K and 6 atm, 1 kmol of N ionizes to form an          14.62 An isolated system has two phases, denoted by A and B,
   equilibrium mixture of N, N, and e in which the amount of            each of which consists of the same two substances, denoted by
                                                                        1 and 2. The phases are separated by a freely moving, thin wall
   N present is 0.95 kmol. Determine the ionization-equilibrium         permeable only by substance 2. Determine the necessary con-
   constant at this temperature for N S d N  e.                         ditions for equilibrium.

Considering Simultaneous Reactions                                   14.63 Referring to Problem 14.63, let each phase be a binary
                                                                        mixture of argon and helium and the wall be permeable only
14.53 Carbon dioxide (CO2), oxygen (O2), and nitrogen (N2)              to argon. If the phases initially are at the conditions tabulated
   enter a reactor operating at steady state with equal molar flow      below, determine the final equilibrium temperature, pressure,
   rates. An equilibrium mixture of CO2, O2, N2, CO, and NO             and composition in the two phases.
   exits at 3000 K, 5 atm. Determine the molar analysis of the
   equilibrium mixture.

14.54 An equimolar mixture of carbon monoxide and water va-          T (K) p (MPa) n (kmol) yAr yHe
   por enters a heat exchanger operating at steady state. An equi-
   librium mixture of CO, CO2, O2, H2O(g), and H2 exits at           Phase A 300  0.2       6  0.5 0.5
   2227C, 1 atm. Determine the molar analysis of the exiting
   equilibrium mixture.                                              Phase B 400  0.1       5  0.8 0.2

14.55 Butane (C4H10) burns with 100% excess air to form an           14.64 Figure P14.65 shows an ideal gas mixture at temperature
                                                                        T and pressure p containing substance k, separated from a gas
equilibrium mixture at 1400 K, 20 atm consisting of CO2, O2,            phase of pure k at temperature T and pressure p by a semi-
                                                                        permeable membrane that allows only k to pass through. As-
H2O(g), N2, NO, and NO2. Determine the balanced reaction                suming the ideal gas model also applies to the pure gas phase,
                                                           1010.        determine the relationship between p and p for there to be no
equation.  For N2    2O2  S  2NO2  at 1400 K,  K    8.4                 net transfer of k through the membrane.
                          d

14.56 Steam enters a heat exchanger operating at steady state.

An equilibrium mixture of H2O, H2, O2, H, and OH exits at
temperature T, 1 atm. Determine the molar analysis of the

exiting equilibrium mixture for                                                             Membrane permeable
                                                                                                   only to k
(a) T  2800 K.                                                         Ideal gas mixture
(b) T  3000 K.                                                           at T, p. Mole           Ideal gas k
                                                                                                  at, T, p´
                                                                     fraction of substance
Considering Phase Equilibrium                                            k is yk, partial

14.57 For a two-phase liquid­vapor mixture of water at 100C,           pressure pk = ykp
   use tabulated property data to show that the specific Gibbs
   functions of the saturated liquid and saturated vapor are equal.   Figure P14.64
   Repeat for a two-phase liquid­vapor mixture of Refrigerant
   134a at 20C.                                                      14.65 What is the maximum number of homogeneous phases
                                                                        that can exist at equilibrium for a system involving
14.58 Using the Clapeyron equation, solve the following prob-
   lems from Chap. 11: (a) 11.32, (b) 11.33, (c) 11.34, (d) 11.35,      (a) one component?
   (e) 11.40.                                                           (b) two components?
                                                                        (c) three components?
14.59 A closed system at 20C, 1 bar consists of a pure liquid
   water phase in equilibrium with a vapor phase composed of         14.66 Determine the number of degrees of freedom for systems
   water vapor and dry air. Determine the departure, in percent,        composed of
   of the partial pressure of the water vapor from the saturation
   pressure of pure water at 20C.                                       (a) ice and liquid water.
                                                                        (b) ice, liquid water, and water vapor.
14.60 Derive an expression for estimating the pressure at which         (c) liquid water and water vapor.
   graphite and diamond exist in equilibrium at 25C in terms of         (d) water vapor only.
   the specific volume, specific Gibbs function, and isothermal         (e) water vapor and dry air.
   compressibility of each phase at 25C, 1 atm. Discuss.                (f) liquid water, water vapor, and dry air.
                                                                        (g) ice, water vapor, and dry air.
14.61 An isolated system has two phases, denoted by A and               (h) N2 and O2 at 20C, 1 atm.
   B, each of which consists of the same two substances, de-            (i) a liquid phase and a vapor phase, each of which contains
   noted by 1 and 2. Show that necessary conditions for equi-
   librium are                                                              ammonia and water.
                                                                        (j) liquid mercury, liquid water, and a vapor phase of mercury
      1. the temperature of each phase is the same, TA  TB.
      2. the pressure of each phase is the same, pA  pB.                    and water.
      3. the chemical potential of each component has the same          (k) liquid acetone and a vapor phase of acetone and N2.

         value in each phase, m1A  mB1 , mA2  m2B.                   14.67 Develop the phase rule for chemically reacting systems.
716 Chapter 14 Chemical and Phase Equilibrium                          thus, pi  xi p where xi is the mole fraction of i in the gas phase.
                                                                       Apply Raoult's law to the following cases, which are
14.68 Apply the result of Problem 14.84 to determine the num-          representative of conditions that might be encountered in
   ber of degrees of freedom for the gas phase reaction:               ammonia­water absorption systems (Sec. 10.5):

                       CH4  H2O d S CO  3H2                            (a) Consider a two-phase, liquid­vapor ammonia­water
                                                                            system in equilibrium at 20C. The mole fraction of
14.69 For a gas­liquid system in equilibrium at temperature T               ammonia in the liquid phase is 80%. Determine the
   and pressure p, Raoult's law models the relation between the             pressure, in bar, and the mole fraction of ammonia in the
   partial pressure of substance i in the gas phase, pi, and the mole       vapor phase.
   fraction of substance i in the liquid phase, yi, as follows:
                                                                       (b) Determine the mole fractions of ammonia in the liquid and
                              pi  yipsat,i 1T 2                             vapor phases of a two-phase ammonia­water system in
                                                                            equilibrium at 40C, 12 bar.
   where psat,i(T ) is the saturation pressure of pure i at tempera-
   ture T. The gas phase is assumed to form an ideal gas mixture;

Design & Open Ended Problems: Exploring Engineering Practice

14.1D Using appropriate software, develop plots giving the             14.4D The amount of sulfur dioxide (SO2) present in off gases
   variation with equivalence ratio of the equilibrium products of        from industrial processes can be reduced by oxidizing the SO2
   octane­air mixtures at 30 atm and selected temperatures rang-          to SO3 at an elevated temperature in a catalytic reactor. The
   ing from 1700 to 2800 K. Consider equivalence ratios in the            SO3 can be reacted in turn with water to form sulfuric acid that
   interval from 0.2 to 1.4 and equilibrium products including,           has economic value. For an off gas at 1 atm having the molar
   but not necessarily limited to, CO2, CO, H2O, O2, O, H2, N2,           analysis of 12% SO2, 8% O2, 80% N2, estimate the range of
   NO, OH. Under what conditions is the formation of nitric oxide         temperatures at which a substantial conversion of SO2 to SO3
   (NO) and carbon monoxide (CO) most significant? Discuss.               might be realized.

14.2D Spark-ignition engine exhaust gases contain several air          14.5D A gaseous mixture of hydrogen (H2) and carbon monox-
   pollutants including the oxides of nitrogen, NO and NO2, col-          ide (CO) enters a catalytic reactor and a gaseous mixture of
   lectively known as NOx. Additionally, the exhaust gases may            methanol (CH3OH), hydrogen, and carbon monoxide exits. At
   contain carbon monoxide (CO) and unburned or partially                 the preliminary process design stage, a plausible estimate is
   burned hydrocarbons (HC).                                              required of the inlet hydrogen mole fraction, yH2, the temper-
                                                                          ature of the exiting mixture, Te, and the pressure of the exiting
   (a) The pollutant amounts actually present depend on engine            mixture, pe, subject to the following four constraints: (1)
        design and operating conditions, and typically differ sig-        0.5  yH2  0.75, (2) 300  Te  400 K, (3) 1  pe  10
        nificantly from values calculated on the basis of chemical        atm, and (4) the exiting mixture contains at least 75% methanol
        equilibrium. Discuss both the reasons for these discrepan-        on a molar basis. Obtain this estimate.
        cies and possible mechanisms by which such pollutants are
        formed in an actual engine.                                    14.6D When systems in thermal, mechanical, and chemical equi-
                                                                          librium are perturbed, changes within the systems can occur
   (b) For spark-ignition engines, the average production of pol-         leading to a new equilibrium state. The effects of perturbing the
        lutants upstream of the catalyst, in g per mile of vehicle        system considered in developing Eqs. 14.32 and 14.33 can be
        travel, are nitric oxides, 1.5; hydrocarbons, 2; and carbon       determined by study of these equations. For example, at fixed
        monoxide, 20. For a city in your locale having a popula-          pressure and temperature it can be concluded that an increase in
        tion of 100,000 or more, estimate the annual amount, in           the amount of the inert component E would lead to increases in
        kg, of each pollutant that would be discharged if automo-         nC and nD when   (C  D  A  B) is positive, to
        biles had no emission control devices. Repeat if the              decreases in nC and nD when  is negative, and no change when
        vehicles adhere to current U.S. government emissions                0.
        standards.
                                                                          (a) For a system consisting of NH3, N2, and H2 at fixed pres-
14.3D The Federal Clean Air Act of 1970 and succeeding Clean                   sure and temperature, subject to the reaction
   Air Act Amendments target the oxides of nitrogen NO and
   NO2, collectively known as NOx, as significant air pollutants.                            2NH31g2  N21g2  3H21g2
   NOx is formed in combustion via three primary mechanisms:
   thermal NOx formation, prompt NOx formation, and fuel NOx                   investigate the effects, in turn, of additions in the amounts
   formation. Discuss these formation mechanisms, including a                  present of NH3, H2, and N2.
   discussion of thermal NOx formation by the Zeldovich mech-             (b) For the general case of Eqs. 14.32 and 14.33, investigate
   anism. What is the role of NOx in the formation of ozone? What              the effects, in turn, of additions of A, B, C, and D.
   are some NOx reduction strategies?
                                                                      Problems: Developing Engineering Skills 717

14.7D With reference to the equilibrium constant data of                 (b) For the synthesis of ammonia by
   Table A-27:                                                                                   12N2  23H2 S NH3

   (a) For each of the tabulated reactions plot log10K versus 1T         provide a recommendation for the ranges of temperature and
        and determine the slope of the line of best fit. What is         pressure for which the mole fraction of ammonia in the mix-
        the thermodynamic significance of the slope? Check your          ture is at least 0.5.
        conclusion about the slope using data from the JANAF
        tables.2                                                      14.9D U.S. Patent 5,298,233 describes a means for converting
                                                                         industrial wastes to carbon dioxide and water vapor. Hydrogen-
   (b) A text states that the magnitude of the equilibrium con-          and carbon-containing feed, such as organic or inorganic
        stant often signals the importance of a reaction, and offers     sludge, low-grade fuel oil, or municipal garbage, is introduced
        this rule of thumb: When K  103, the extent of the re-           into a molten bath consisting of two immiscible molten metal
        action is usually not significant, whereas when K  103           phases. The carbon and hydrogen of the feed are converted,
        the reaction generally proceeds closely to equilibrium.          respectively, to dissolved carbon and dissolved hydrogen. The
        Confirm or deny this rule.                                       dissolved carbon is oxidized in the first molten metal phase to
                                                                         carbon dioxide, which is released to the atmosphere. The dis-
14.8D (a) For an equilibrium ideal gas mixture of N2, H2, and            solved hydrogen migrates to the second molten metal phase,
   NH3, evaluate the equilibrium constant from an expression you         where it is oxidized to form water vapor, which is also released
   derive from the van't Hoff equation that requires only standard       from the bath. Critically evaluate this technology for waste dis-
   state enthalpy of formation and Gibbs function of formation           posal. Is the technology promising commercially? Compare
   data together with suitable analytical expressions in terms of        with alternative waste management practices such as pyroly-
   temperature for the ideal gas specific heats of N2, H2, NH3.          sis and incineration.

2Stull, D. R., and H. Prophet, JANAF Thermochemical Tables, 2nd ed.,  14.10D Iceland Aims to be Fossil-fuel Free (see box
NSRDS-NBS 37, National Bureau of Standards, Washington, DC, June         Sec. 14.2). Investigate the feasibility of large-scale production
1971.                                                                    of hydrogen using solar energy and windpower, considering
                                                                         technical and economical aspects. Write a report including at
                                                                         least three references.
Index to Tables in SI Units

TABLE A-1   Atomic or Molecular Weights and Critical Properties of Selected Elements and Compounds 719
TABLE A-2
TABLE A-3   Properties of Saturated Water (Liquid­Vapor): Temperature Table                         720
TABLE A-4
TABLE A-5   Properties of Saturated Water (Liquid­Vapor): Pressure Table                            722
TABLE A-6
TABLE A-7   Properties of Superheated Water Vapor                                                   724
TABLE A-8
TABLE A-9   Properties of Compressed Liquid Water                                                   728
TABLE A-10
TABLE A-11  Properties of Saturated Water (Solid­Vapor): Temperature Table                          729
TABLE A-12
TABLE A-13  Properties of Saturated Refrigerant 22 (Liquid­Vapor): Temperature Table                730
TABLE A-14
TABLE A-15  Properties of Saturated Refrigerant 22 (Liquid­Vapor): Pressure Table                   731
TABLE A-16
TABLE A-17  Properties of Superheated Refrigerant 22 Vapor                                          732
TABLE A-18
TABLE A-19  Properties of Saturated Refrigerant 134a (Liquid­Vapor): Temperature Table              736
TABLE A-20
TABLE A-21  Properties of Saturated Refrigerant 134a (Liquid­Vapor): Pressure Table                 737
TABLE A-22
TABLE A-23  Properties of Superheated Refrigerant 134a Vapor                                        738
TABLE A-24
            Properties of Saturated Ammonia (Liquid­Vapor): Temperature Table                       741
TABLE A-25
TABLE A-26  Properties of Saturated Ammonia (Liquid­Vapor): Pressure Table                          742
TABLE A-27
            Properties of Superheated Ammonia Vapor                                                 743

            Properties of Saturated Propane (Liquid­Vapor): Temperature Table                       747

            Properties of Saturated Propane (Liquid­Vapor): Pressure Table                          748

            Properties of Superheated Propane Vapor                                                 749

            Properties of Selected Solids and Liquids: cp, , and .                                  753

            Ideal Gas Specific Heats of Some Common Gases                                           754

            Variation of cp with Temperature for Selected Ideal Gases                               755

            Ideal Gas Properties of Air                                                             756

            Ideal Gas Properties of Selected Gases                                                  758

            Constants for the van der Waals, Redlich­Kwong, and Benedict­Webb­Rubin Equations

            of State                                                                                762

            Thermochemical Properties of Selected Substances at 298 K and 1 atm                     763

            Standard Molar Chemical Exergy, e ch (kJ/kmol), of Selected Substances at 298 K and p0  764

            Logarithms to the Base 10 of the Equilibrium Constant K                                 765

718
                                                                                                                   Tables in SI Units 719

TABLE A-1 Atomic or Molecular Weights and Critical Properties of Selected                                                                  Table A-1
Elements and Compounds

                  Chemical  M          Tc       pc                              Zc    pcvc
                                              (bar)                                   RTc
Substance         Formula   (kg/kmol)  (K)
                                               62.8
Acetylene         C2H2      26.04      309     37.7                                 0.274
Air (equivalent)  --                          112.8                                 0.284
Ammonia           NH3       28.97      133                                          0.242
                                               48.6
Argon             Ar        17.03      406     49.3
Benzene           C6H6                         38.0
Butane            C4H10     39.94      151                                          0.290
                                               --                                   0.274
Carbon            C         78.11      563     73.9                                 0.274
Carbon dioxide    CO2                          35.0
Carbon monoxide   CO        58.12      425

                            12.01      --                                            --
                                                                                    0.276
                            44.01      304                                          0.294

                            28.01      133

Copper            Cu        63.54      --     --                                    --
Ethane            C2H6
Ethyl alcohol     C2H5OH    30.07      305    48.8                                  0.285

                            46.07      516    63.8                                  0.249

Ethylene          C2H4      28.05      283    51.2                                  0.270
Helium            He                                                                0.300
Hydrogen          H2        4.003      5.2                                 2.3      0.304

                            2.016      33.2   13.0

Methane           CH4       16.04      191    46.4                                  0.290
Methyl alcohol    CH3OH
Nitrogen          N2        32.04      513    79.5                                  0.220

                            28.01      126    33.9                                  0.291

Octane            C8H18     114.22     569    24.9                                  0.258
Oxygen            O2
Propane           C3H8      32.00      154    50.5                                  0.290

                            44.09      370    42.7                                  0.276

Propylene         C3H6      42.08      365    46.2                                  0.276
Refrigerant 12
Refrigerant 22    CCl2F2    120.92     385    41.2                                  0.278

                  CHClF2    86.48      369    49.8                                  0.267

Refrigerant 134a  CF3CH2F   102.03     374     40.7                                 0.260
Sulfur dioxide    SO2        64.06     431     78.7                                 0.268
Water             H2O        18.02     647.3  220.9                                 0.233

Sources: Adapted from International Critical Tables and L. C. Nelson and E. F. Obert, Generalized Compressibility
Charts, Chem. Eng., 61: 203 (1954).
     720 Tables in SI Units

     TABLE A-2 Properties of Saturated Water (Liquid­Vapor): Temperature Table

                             Specific Volume  Internal Energy                   Enthalpy          Entropy
                                   m3/kg            kJ/kg                         kJ/kg           kJ/kg # K

H2O  Temp.  Press.    Sat.    Sat.             Sat.    Sat.     Sat.            Evap.      Sat.    Sat.    Sat.   Temp.
       C     bar             Vapor            Liquid  Vapor    Liquid            hfg      Vapor   Liquid  Vapor     C
                     Liquid
                    vf  103    vg               uf      ug       hf                         hg       sf     sg     .01
                                                                                                                    4
     .01    0.00611 1.0002 206.136             0.00   2375.3    0.01            2501.3    2501.4  0.0000  9.1562    5
                                              16.77   2380.9   16.78            2491.9    2508.7  0.0610  9.0514    6
     4      0.00813 1.0001 157.232            20.97   2382.3   20.98            2489.6    2510.6  0.0761  9.0257    8
                                              25.19   2383.6   25.20            2487.2    2512.4  0.0912  9.0003
     5      0.00872 1.0001 147.120            33.59   2386.4   33.60            2482.5    2516.1  0.1212  8.9501   10
                                                                                                                   11
     6      0.00935 1.0001 137.734                                                                                 12
                                                                                                                   13
     8      0.01072 1.0002 120.917                                                                                 14

     10     0.01228 1.0004 106.379            42.00   2389.2   42.01            2477.7    2519.8  0.1510  8.9008   15
                                              46.20   2390.5   46.20            2475.4    2521.6  0.1658  8.8765   16
     11     0.01312 1.0004 99.857             50.41   2391.9   50.41            2473.0    2523.4  0.1806  8.8524   17
                                              54.60   2393.3   54.60            2470.7    2525.3  0.1953  8.8285   18
     12     0.01402 1.0005 93.784             58.79   2394.7   58.80            2468.3    2527.1  0.2099  8.8048   19

     13     0.01497 1.0007 88.124                                                                                  20
                                                                                                                   21
     14     0.01598 1.0008 82.848                                                                                  22
                                                                                                                   23
     15     0.01705 1.0009 77.926             62.99   2396.1   62.99            2465.9    2528.9  0.2245  8.7814   24
                                              67.18   2397.4   67.19            2463.6    2530.8  0.2390  8.7582
     16     0.01818 1.0011 73.333             71.38   2398.8   71.38            2461.2    2532.6  0.2535  8.7351   25
                                              75.57   2400.2   75.58            2458.8    2534.4  0.2679  8.7123   26
     17     0.01938 1.0012 69.044             79.76   2401.6   79.77            2456.5    2536.2  0.2823  8.6897   27
                                                                                                                   28
     18     0.02064 1.0014 65.038                                                                                  29

     19     0.02198 1.0016 61.293                                                                                  30
                                                                                                                   31
     20     0.02339 1.0018 57.791             83.95 2402.9 83.96 2454.1 2538.1                    0.2966  8.6672   32
                                                                                                  0.3109  8.6450   33
     21     0.02487 1.0020 54.514             88.14 2404.3 88.14 2451.8 2539.9                    0.3251  8.6229   34
                                                                                                  0.3393  8.6011
     22     0.02645 1.0022 51.447             92.32 2405.7 92.33 2449.4 2541.7                    0.3534  8.5794   35
                                                                                                                   36
     23     0.02810 1.0024 48.574             96.51 2407.0 96.52 2447.0 2543.5                                     38
                                                                                                                   40
     24     0.02985 1.0027 45.883             100.70 2408.4 100.70 2444.7 2545.4                                   45

     25     0.03169 1.0029 43.360             104.88 2409.8 104.89 2442.3 2547.2                  0.3674  8.5580
                                                                                                  0.3814  8.5367
     26     0.03363 1.0032 40.994             109.06 2411.1 109.07 2439.9 2549.0                  0.3954  8.5156
                                                                                                  0.4093  8.4946
     27     0.03567 1.0035 38.774             113.25 2412.5 113.25 2437.6 2550.8                  0.4231  8.4739

     28     0.03782 1.0037 36.690             117.42 2413.9 117.43 2435.2 2552.6

     29     0.04008 1.0040 34.733             121.60 2415.2 121.61 2432.8 2554.5

     30     0.04246 1.0043 32.894             125.78 2416.6 125.79 2430.5 2556.3                  0.4369  8.4533
                                                                                                  0.4507  8.4329
     31     0.04496 1.0046 31.165             129.96 2418.0 129.97 2428.1 2558.1                  0.4644  8.4127
                                                                                                  0.4781  8.3927
     32     0.04759 1.0050 29.540             134.14 2419.3 134.15 2425.7 2559.9                  0.4917  8.3728

     33     0.05034 1.0053 28.011             138.32 2420.7 138.33 2423.4 2561.7

     34     0.05324 1.0056 26.571             142.50 2422.0 142.50 2421.0 2563.5

     35     0.05628 1.0060 25.216             146.67 2423.4 146.68 2418.6 2565.3                  0.5053  8.3531
                                                                                                  0.5188  8.3336
     36     0.05947 1.0063 23.940             150.85 2424.7 150.86 2416.2 2567.1                  0.5458  8.2950
                                                                                                  0.5725  8.2570
     38     0.06632 1.0071 21.602             159.20 2427.4 159.21 2411.5 2570.7                  0.6387  8.1648

     40     0.07384 1.0078 19.523             167.56 2430.1 167.57 2406.7 2574.3

     45     0.09593 1.0099 15.258             188.44 2436.8 188.45 2394.8 2583.2
                                                                                   Tables in SI Units 721

TABLE A-2 (Continued)

                       Specific Volume  Internal Energy          Enthalpy          Entropy
                             m3/kg            kJ/kg                kJ/kg           kJ/kg # K

Temp.   Press.    Sat.    Sat.           Sat.    Sat.     Sat.   Evap.      Sat.    Sat.    Sat.   Temp.                                        H2O
  C      bar             Vapor          Liquid  Vapor    Liquid   hfg      Vapor   Liquid  Vapor     C
                 Liquid
                vf  103    vg             uf      ug       hf                hg       sf     sg

50      .1235 1.0121 12.032             209.32 2443.5 209.33 2382.7 2592.1 .7038 8.0763 50

55      .1576 1.0146     9.568          230.21 2450.1 230.23 2370.7 2600.9 .7679 7.9913 55

60      .1994 1.0172     7.671          251.11 2456.6 251.13 2358.5 2609.6 .8312 7.9096 60

65      .2503 1.0199     6.197          272.02 2463.1 272.06 2346.2 2618.3 .8935 7.8310 65

70      .3119 1.0228     5.042          292.95 2469.6 292.98 2333.8 2626.8 .9549 7.7553 70

75      .3858 1.0259     4.131          313.90 2475.9 313.93 2321.4 2635.3 1.0155 7.6824 75

80      .4739 1.0291     3.407          334.86 2482.2 334.91 2308.8 2643.7 1.0753 7.6122 80

85      .5783 1.0325     2.828          355.84 2488.4 355.90 2296.0 2651.9 1.1343 7.5445 85

90      .7014 1.0360     2.361          376.85 2494.5 376.92 2283.2 2660.1 1.1925 7.4791 90

95      .8455 1.0397     1.982          397.88 2500.6 397.96 2270.2 2668.1 1.2500 7.4159 95

100     1.014   1.0435   1.673          418.94 2506.5 419.04 2257.0 2676.1 1.3069 7.3549 100

110     1.433   1.0516   1.210          461.14 2518.1 461.30 2230.2 2691.5 1.4185 7.2387 110

120     1.985   1.0603   0.8919         503.50 2529.3 503.71 2202.6 2706.3 1.5276 7.1296 120

130     2.701   1.0697   0.6685         546.02 2539.9 546.31 2174.2 2720.5 1.6344 7.0269 130

140     3.613   1.0797   0.5089         588.74 2550.0 589.13 2144.7 2733.9 1.7391 6.9299 140

150     4.758   1.0905   0.3928         631.68 2559.5 632.20 2114.3 2746.5 1.8418 6.8379 150

160     6.178   1.1020   0.3071         674.86 2568.4 675.55 2082.6 2758.1 1.9427 6.7502 160

170     7.917   1.1143   0.2428         718.33 2576.5 719.21 2049.5 2768.7 2.0419 6.6663 170

180     10.02   1.1274   0.1941         762.09 2583.7 763.22 2015.0 2778.2 2.1396 6.5857 180

190     12.54   1.1414   0.1565         806.19 2590.0 807.62 1978.8 2786.4 2.2359 6.5079 190

200     15.54   1.1565   0.1274          850.65 2595.3 852.45 1940.7 2793.2 2.3309 6.4323 200
                1.1726   0.1044          895.53 2599.5 897.76 1900.7 2798.5 2.4248 6.3585 210
210     19.06   1.1900   0.08619         940.87 2602.4 943.62 1858.5 2802.1 2.5178 6.2861 220
                1.2088   0.07158         986.74 2603.9 990.12 1813.8 2804.0 2.6099 6.2146 230
220     23.18   1.2291   0.05976        1033.2 2604.0 1037.3 1766.5 2803.8 2.7015 6.1437 240

230     27.95

240     33.44

250     39.73   1.2512   0.05013        1080.4  2602.4   1085.4  1716.2 2801.5 2.7927 6.0730 250
                1.2755   0.04221        1128.4  2599.0   1134.4  1662.5 2796.6 2.8838 6.0019 260
260     46.88   1.3023   0.03564        1177.4  2593.7   1184.5  1605.2 2789.7 2.9751 5.9301 270
                1.3321   0.03017        1227.5  2586.1   1236.0  1543.6 2779.6 3.0668 5.8571 280
270     54.99   1.3656   0.02557        1278.9  2576.0   1289.1  1477.1 2766.2 3.1594 5.7821 290

280     64.12

290     74.36

300      85.81  1.4036   0.02167        1332.0  2563.0   1344.0  1404.9    2749.0  3.2534  5.7045  300
320     112.7   1.4988   0.01549        1444.6  2525.5   1461.5  1238.6    2700.1  3.4480  5.5362  320
340     145.9   1.6379   0.01080        1570.3  2464.6   1594.2  1027.9    2622.0  3.6594  5.3357  340
360     186.5   1.8925   0.006945       1725.2  2351.5   1760.5   720.5    2481.0  3.9147  5.0526  360
374.14  220.9   3.155    0.003155       2029.6  2029.6   2099.3            2099.3  4.4298  4.4298  374.14
                                                                     0

Source: Tables A-2 through A-5 are extracted from J. H. Keenan, F. G. Keyes, P. G. Hill, and J. G. Moore, Steam Tables, Wiley, New York, 1969.
     722 Tables in SI Units

     TABLE A-3 Properties of Saturated Water (Liquid­Vapor): Pressure Table

                    Specific Volume   Internal Energy                        Enthalpy          Entropy
                          m3/kg             kJ/kg                              kJ/kg           kJ/kg # K

H2O  Press.  Temp.    Sat.    Sat.     Sat.     Sat.    Sat.                 Evap.      Sat.    Sat.    Sat.   Press.
      bar      C             Vapor    Liquid   Vapor   Liquid                 hfg      Vapor   Liquid  Vapor     bar
                     Liquid
                    vf  103    vg       uf       ug      hf                              hg       sf     sg       0.04
                                                                                                                  0.06
     0.04 28.96 1.0040 34.800         121.45   2415.2  121.46                2432.9    2554.4  0.4226  8.4746     0.08
     0.06 36.16 1.0064 23.739         151.53   2425.0  151.53                2415.9    2567.4  0.5210  8.3304     0.10
     0.08 41.51 1.0084 18.103         173.87   2432.2  173.88                2403.1    2577.0  0.5926  8.2287     0.20
     0.10 45.81 1.0102 14.674         191.82   2437.9  191.83                2392.8    2584.7  0.6493  8.1502
     0.20 60.06 1.0172 7.649          251.38   2456.7  251.40                2358.3    2609.7  0.8320  7.9085     0.30
                                                                                                                  0.40
     0.30 69.10 1.0223       5.229    289.20   2468.4  289.23                2336.1    2625.3  0.9439  7.7686     0.50
     0.40 75.87 1.0265       3.993    317.53   2477.0  317.58                2319.2    2636.8  1.0259  7.6700     0.60
     0.50 81.33 1.0300       3.240    340.44   2483.9  340.49                2305.4    2645.9  1.0910  7.5939     0.70
     0.60 85.94 1.0331       2.732    359.79   2489.6  359.86                2293.6    2653.5  1.1453  7.5320
     0.70 89.95 1.0360       2.365    376.63   2494.5  376.70                2283.3    2660.0  1.1919  7.4797     0.80
                                                                                                                  0.90
     0.80 93.50     1.0380   2.087    391.58   2498.8  391.66                2274.1    2665.8  1.2329  7.4346     1.00
     0.90 96.71     1.0410   1.869    405.06   2502.6  405.15                2265.7    2670.9  1.2695  7.3949     1.50
     1.00 99.63     1.0432   1.694    417.36   2506.1  417.46                2258.0    2675.5  1.3026  7.3594     2.00
     1.50 111.4     1.0528   1.159    466.94   2519.7  467.11                2226.5    2693.6  1.4336  7.2233
     2.00 120.2     1.0605   0.8857   504.49   2529.5  504.70                2201.9    2706.7  1.5301  7.1271     2.50
                                                                                                                  3.00
     2.50 127.4     1.0672   0.7187   535.10   2537.2  535.37                2181.5    2716.9  1.6072  7.0527     3.50
     3.00 133.6     1.0732   0.6058   561.15   2543.6  561.47                2163.8    2725.3  1.6718  6.9919     4.00
     3.50 138.9     1.0786   0.5243   583.95   2546.9  584.33                2148.1    2732.4  1.7275  6.9405     4.50
     4.00 143.6     1.0836   0.4625   604.31   2553.6  604.74                2133.8    2738.6  1.7766  6.8959
     4.50 147.9     1.0882   0.4140   622.25   2557.6  623.25                2120.7    2743.9  1.8207  6.8565     5.00
                                                                                                                  6.00
     5.00 151.9     1.0926   0.3749   639.68   2561.2  640.23                2108.5    2748.7  1.8607  6.8212     7.00
     6.00 158.9     1.1006   0.3157   669.90   2567.4  670.56                2086.3    2756.8  1.9312  6.7600     8.00
     7.00 165.0     1.1080   0.2729   696.44   2572.5  697.22                2066.3    2763.5  1.9922  6.7080     9.00
     8.00 170.4     1.1148   0.2404   720.22   2576.8  721.11                2048.0    2769.1  2.0462  6.6628
     9.00 175.4     1.1212   0.2150   741.83   2580.5  742.83                2031.1    2773.9  2.0946  6.6226   10.0
                                                                                                                15.0
     10.0 179.9     1.1273   0.1944    761.68  2583.6   762.81               2015.3    2778.1  2.1387  6.5863   20.0
     15.0 198.3     1.1539   0.1318    843.16  2594.5   844.84               1947.3    2792.2  2.3150  6.4448   25.0
     20.0 212.4     1.1767   0.09963   906.44  2600.3   908.79               1890.7    2799.5  2.4474  6.3409   30.0
     25.0 224.0     1.1973   0.07998   959.11  2603.1   962.11               1841.0    2803.1  2.5547  6.2575
     30.0 233.9     1.2165   0.06668  1004.8   2604.1  1008.4                1795.7    2804.2  2.6457  6.1869   35.0
                                                                                                                40.0
     35.0 242.6     1.2347   0.05707  1045.4   2603.7  1049.8                1753.7    2803.4  2.7253  6.1253   45.0
     40.0 250.4     1.2522   0.04978  1082.3   2602.3  1087.3                1714.1    2801.4  2.7964  6.0701   50.0
     45.0 257.5     1.2692   0.04406  1116.2   2600.1  1121.9                1676.4    2798.3  2.8610  6.0199   60.0
     50.0 264.0     1.2859   0.03944  1147.8   2597.1  1154.2                1640.1    2794.3  2.9202  5.9734
     60.0 275.6     1.3187   0.03244  1205.4   2589.7  1213.4                1571.0    2784.3  3.0267  5.8892   70.0
                                                                                                                80.0
      70.0   285.9  1.3513   0.02737  1257.6   2580.5  1267.0                1505.1    2772.1  3.1211  5.8133   90.0
      80.0   295.1  1.3842   0.02352  1305.6   2569.8  1316.6                1441.3    2758.0  3.2068  5.7432  100.
      90.0   303.4  1.4178   0.02048  1350.5   2557.8  1363.3                1378.9    2742.1  3.2858  5.6772  110.
     100.    311.1  1.4524   0.01803  1393.0   2544.4  1407.6                1317.1    2724.7  3.3596  5.6141
     110.    318.2  1.4886   0.01599  1433.7   2529.8  1450.1                1255.5    2705.6  3.4295  5.5527
                                                                             Tables in SI Units 723

TABLE A-3 (Continued)

               Specific Volume    Internal Energy          Enthalpy          Entropy
                     m3/kg              kJ/kg                kJ/kg           kJ/kg # K

Press.  Temp.    Sat.    Sat.      Sat.    Sat.     Sat.   Evap.      Sat.    Sat.    Sat.   Press.  H2O
 bar      C             Vapor     Liquid  Vapor    Liquid   hfg      Vapor   Liquid  Vapor     bar
                Liquid
               vf  103    vg        uf      ug       hf                hg       sf     sg    120.
                                                                                             130.
120. 324.8 1.5267 0.01426         1473.0  2513.7   1491.3  1193.6    2684.9  3.4962  5.4924  140.
130. 330.9 1.5671 0.01278         1511.1  2496.1   1531.5  1130.7    2662.2  3.5606  5.4323  150.
140. 336.8 1.6107 0.01149         1548.6  2476.8   1571.1  1066.5    2637.6  3.6232  5.3717  160.
150. 342.2 1.6581 0.01034         1585.6  2455.5   1610.5  1000.0    2610.5  3.6848  5.3098
160. 347.4 1.7107 0.009306        1622.7  2431.7   1650.1   930.6    2580.6  3.7461  5.2455  170.
                                                                                             180.
170.    352.4  1.7702   0.008364  1660.2  2405.0   1690.3  856.9     2547.2  3.8079  5.1777  190.
180.    357.1  1.8397   0.007489  1698.9  2374.3   1732.0  777.1     2509.1  3.8715  5.1044  200.
190.    361.5  1.9243   0.006657  1739.9  2338.1   1776.5  688.0     2464.5  3.9388  5.0228  220.9
200.    365.8  2.036    0.005834  1785.6  2293.0   1826.3  583.4     2409.7  4.0139  4.9269
220.9   374.1  3.155    0.003155  2029.6  2029.6   2099.3            2099.3  4.4298  4.4298
                                                              0
     724 Tables in SI Units

                             TABLE A-4 Properties of Superheated Water Vapor

                             T  v  u  h                    s                  v  u  h                    s

                             C m3/kg kJ/kg kJ/kg kJ/kg # K                    m3/kg kJ/kg kJ/kg kJ/kg # K

                                   p  0.06 bar  0.006 MPa                        p  0.35 bar  0.035 MPa
                                         (Tsat  36.16C)                                (Tsat  72.69C)

H2O                          Sat. 23.739 2425.0 2567.4   8.3304               4.526 2473.0 2631.4   7.7158
                              80 27.132 2487.3 2650.1    8.5804               4.625 2483.7 2645.6   7.7564
                             120 30.219 2544.7 2726.0    8.7840               5.163 2542.4 2723.1   7.9644

                             160 33.302 2602.7 2802.5    8.9693               5.696 2601.2 2800.6   8.1519
                             200 36.383 2661.4 2879.7    9.1398               6.228 2660.4 2878.4   8.3237
                             240 39.462 2721.0 2957.8    9.2982               6.758 2720.3 2956.8   8.4828

                             280 42.540 2781.5 3036.8    9.4464               7.287 2780.9 3036.0   8.6314
                             320 45.618 2843.0 3116.7    9.5859               7.815 2842.5 3116.1   8.7712
                             360 48.696 2905.5 3197.7    9.7180               8.344 2905.1 3197.1   8.9034

                             400 51.774 2969.0 3279.6    9.8435                8.872 2968.6 3279.2  9.0291
                             440 54.851 3033.5 3362.6    9.9633                9.400 3033.2 3362.2  9.1490
                             500 59.467 3132.3 3489.1   10.1336               10.192 3132.1 3488.8  9.3194

                                   p  0.70 bar  0.07 MPa                         p  1.0 bar  0.10 MPa
                                         (Tsat  89.95C)                               (Tsat  99.63C)

                             Sat. 2.365 2494.5 2660.0    7.4797               1.694 2506.1 2675.5   7.3594
                             100 2.434 2509.7 2680.0     7.5341               1.696 2506.7 2676.2   7.3614
                             120 2.571 2539.7 2719.6     7.6375               1.793 2537.3 2716.6   7.4668

                             160 2.841 2599.4 2798.2     7.8279               1.984 2597.8 2796.2   7.6597
                             200 3.108 2659.1 2876.7     8.0012               2.172 2658.1 2875.3   7.8343
                             240 3.374 2719.3 2955.5     8.1611               2.359 2718.5 2954.5   7.9949

                             280 3.640 2780.2 3035.0     8.3162               2.546 2779.6 3034.2   8.1445
                             320 3.905 2842.0 3115.3     8.4504               2.732 2841.5 3114.6   8.2849
                             360 4.170 2904.6 3196.5     8.5828               2.917 2904.2 3195.9   8.4175

                             400 4.434 2968.2 3278.6     8.7086               3.103 2967.9 3278.2   8.5435
                             440 4.698 3032.9 3361.8     8.8286               3.288 3032.6 3361.4   8.6636
                             500 5.095 3131.8 3488.5     8.9991               3.565 3131.6 3488.1   8.8342

                                   p  1.5 bar  0.15 MPa                              p  3.0 bar  0.30 MPa
                                       (Tsat  111.37C)                                   (Tsat  133.55C)

                             Sat. 1.159 2519.7 2693.6    7.2233               0.606 2543.6 2725.3 6.9919
                             120 1.188 2533.3 2711.4     7.2693
                             160 1.317 2595.2 2792.8     7.4665               0.651 2587.1 2782.3   7.1276

                             200 1.444 2656.2 2872.9     7.6433               0.716 2650.7 2865.5   7.3115
                             240 1.570 2717.2 2952.7     7.8052               0.781 2713.1 2947.3   7.4774
                             280 1.695 2778.6 3032.8     7.9555               0.844 2775.4 3028.6   7.6299

                             320 1.819 2840.6 3113.5     8.0964               0.907 2838.1 3110.1   7.7722
                             360 1.943 2903.5 3195.0     8.2293               0.969 2901.4 3192.2   7.9061
                             400 2.067 2967.3 3277.4     8.3555               1.032 2965.6 3275.0   8.0330

                             440 2.191 3032.1 3360.7     8.4757               1.094 3030.6 3358.7   8.1538
                             500 2.376 3131.2 3487.6     8.6466               1.187 3130.0 3486.0   8.3251
                             600 2.685 3301.7 3704.3     8.9101               1.341 3300.8 3703.2   8.5892
                                                                 Tables in SI Units 725

TABLE A-4 (Continued)

T  v  u                h    s      v  u  h                  s

C m3/kg kJ/kg kJ/kg kJ/kg # K      m3/kg kJ/kg kJ/kg kJ/kg # K

      p  5.0 bar  0.50 MPa            p  7.0 bar  0.70 MPa
          (Tsat  151.86C)                 (Tsat  164.97C)

Sat. 0.3749 2561.2 2748.7  6.8213  0.2729 2572.5 2763.5  6.7080                          H2O
180 0.4045 2609.7 2812.0   6.9656  0.2847 2599.8 2799.1  6.7880
200 0.4249 2642.9 2855.4   7.0592  0.2999 2634.8 2844.8  6.8865

240 0.4646 2707.6 2939.9   7.2307  0.3292 2701.8 2932.2  7.0641
280 0.5034 2771.2 3022.9   7.3865  0.3574 2766.9 3017.1  7.2233
320 0.5416 2834.7 3105.6   7.5308  0.3852 2831.3 3100.9  7.3697

360 0.5796 2898.7 3188.4   7.6660  0.4126 2895.8 3184.7  7.5063
400 0.6173 2963.2 3271.9   7.7938  0.4397 2960.9 3268.7  7.6350
440 0.6548 3028.6 3356.0   7.9152  0.4667 3026.6 3353.3  7.7571

500 0.7109 3128.4 3483.9   8.0873  0.5070 3126.8 3481.7  7.9299
600 0.8041 3299.6 3701.7   8.3522  0.5738 3298.5 3700.2  8.1956
700 0.8969 3477.5 3925.9   8.5952  0.6403 3476.6 3924.8  8.4391

      p  10.0 bar  1.0 MPa            p  15.0 bar  1.5 MPa
          (Tsat  179.91C)                 (Tsat  198.32C)

Sat. 0.1944 2583.6 2778.1  6.5865  0.1318 2594.5 2792.2  6.4448
200 0.2060 2621.9 2827.9   6.6940  0.1325 2598.1 2796.8  6.4546
240 0.2275 2692.9 2920.4   6.8817  0.1483 2676.9 2899.3  6.6628

280 0.2480 2760.2 3008.2   7.0465  0.1627 2748.6 2992.7  6.8381
320 0.2678 2826.1 3093.9   7.1962  0.1765 2817.1 3081.9  6.9938
360 0.2873 2891.6 3178.9   7.3349  0.1899 2884.4 3169.2  7.1363

400 0.3066 2957.3 3263.9   7.4651  0.2030 2951.3 3255.8  7.2690
440 0.3257 3023.6 3349.3   7.5883  0.2160 3018.5 3342.5  7.3940
500 0.3541 3124.4 3478.5   7.7622  0.2352 3120.3 3473.1  7.5698

540 0.3729 3192.6 3565.6   7.8720  0.2478 3189.1 3560.9  7.6805
600 0.4011 3296.8 3697.9   8.0290  0.2668 3293.9 3694.0  7.8385
640 0.4198 3367.4 3787.2   8.1290  0.2793 3364.8 3783.8  7.9391

      p  20.0 bar  2.0 MPa            p  30.0 bar  3.0 MPa
          (Tsat  212.42C)                 (Tsat  233.90C)

Sat. 0.0996 2600.3 2799.5  6.3409  0.0667 2604.1 2804.2  6.1869
240 0.1085 2659.6 2876.5   6.4952  0.0682 2619.7 2824.3  6.2265
280 0.1200 2736.4 2976.4   6.6828  0.0771 2709.9 2941.3  6.4462

320 0.1308 2807.9 3069.5   6.8452  0.0850 2788.4 3043.4  6.6245
360 0.1411 2877.0 3159.3   6.9917  0.0923 2861.7 3138.7  6.7801
400 0.1512 2945.2 3247.6   7.1271  0.0994 2932.8 3230.9  6.9212

440 0.1611 3013.4 3335.5   7.2540  0.1062 3002.9 3321.5  7.0520
500 0.1757 3116.2 3467.6   7.4317  0.1162 3108.0 3456.5  7.2338
540 0.1853 3185.6 3556.1   7.5434  0.1227 3178.4 3546.6  7.3474

600 0.1996 3290.9 3690.1   7.7024  0.1324 3285.0 3682.3  7.5085
640 0.2091 3362.2 3780.4   7.8035  0.1388 3357.0 3773.5  7.6106
700 0.2232 3470.9 3917.4   7.9487  0.1484 3466.5 3911.7  7.7571
     726 Tables in SI Units

                             TABLE A-4 (Continued)

                             T  v        u          h          s         v      u    h              s
                                                                       m3/kg  kJ/kg
                             C m3/kg kJ/kg kJ/kg kJ/kg # K                           kJ/kg kJ/kg # K

                                         p  40 bar  4.0 MPa                   p  60 bar  6.0 MPa
                                             (Tsat  250.4C)                      (Tsat  275.64C)

H2O                          Sat. 0.04978 2602.3 2801.4        6.0701  0.03244 2589.7 2784.3      5.8892
                             280 0.05546 2680.0 2901.8         6.2568  0.03317 2605.2 2804.2      5.9252
                             320 0.06199 2767.4 3015.4         6.4553  0.03876 2720.0 2952.6      6.1846

                             360 0.06788 2845.7 3117.2         6.6215  0.04331 2811.2 3071.1      6.3782
                             400 0.07341 2919.9 3213.6         6.7690  0.04739 2892.9 3177.2      6.5408
                             440 0.07872 2992.2 3307.1         6.9041  0.05122 2970.0 3277.3      6.6853

                             500 0.08643 3099.5 3445.3         7.0901  0.05665 3082.2 3422.2      6.8803
                             540 0.09145 3171.1 3536.9         7.2056  0.06015 3156.1 3517.0      6.9999
                             600 0.09885 3279.1 3674.4         7.3688  0.06525 3266.9 3658.4      7.1677

                             640 0.1037  3351.8 3766.6         7.4720  0.06859 3341.0 3752.6      7.2731
                             700 0.1110  3462.1 3905.9         7.6198  0.07352 3453.1 3894.1      7.4234
                             740 0.1157  3536.6 3999.6         7.7141  0.07677 3528.3 3989.2      7.5190

                                         p  80 bar  8.0 MPa                   p  100 bar  10.0 MPa
                                            (Tsat  295.06C)                       (Tsat  311.06C)

                             Sat. 0.02352 2569.8 2758.0        5.7432  0.01803 2544.4 2724.7      5.6141
                             320 0.02682 2662.7 2877.2         5.9489  0.01925 2588.8 2781.3      5.7103
                             360 0.03089 2772.7 3019.8         6.1819  0.02331 2729.1 2962.1      6.0060

                             400 0.03432 2863.8 3138.3         6.3634  0.02641 2832.4 3096.5      6.2120
                             440 0.03742 2946.7 3246.1         6.5190  0.02911 2922.1 3213.2      6.3805
                             480 0.04034 3025.7 3348.4         6.6586  0.03160 3005.4 3321.4      6.5282

                             520 0.04313 3102.7 3447.7         6.7871  0.03394 3085.6 3425.1      6.6622
                             560 0.04582 3178.7 3545.3         6.9072  0.03619 3164.1 3526.0      6.7864
                             600 0.04845 3254.4 3642.0         7.0206  0.03837 3241.7 3625.3      6.9029

                             640 0.05102 3330.1 3738.3         7.1283  0.04048 3318.9 3723.7      7.0131
                             700 0.05481 3443.9 3882.4         7.2812  0.04358 3434.7 3870.5      7.1687
                             740 0.05729 3520.4 3978.7         7.3782  0.04560 3512.1 3968.1      7.2670

                                         p  120 bar  12.0 MPa                 p  140 bar  14.0 MPa
                                             (Tsat  324.75C)                      (Tsat  336.75C)

                             Sat. 0.01426 2513.7 2684.9        5.4924  0.01149 2476.8 2637.6      5.3717
                             360 0.01811 2678.4 2895.7         5.8361  0.01422 2617.4 2816.5      5.6602
                             400 0.02108 2798.3 3051.3         6.0747  0.01722 2760.9 3001.9      5.9448

                             440 0.02355 2896.1 3178.7         6.2586  0.01954 2868.6 3142.2      6.1474
                             480 0.02576 2984.4 3293.5         6.4154  0.02157 2962.5 3264.5      6.3143
                             520 0.02781 3068.0 3401.8         6.5555  0.02343 3049.8 3377.8      6.4610

                             560 0.02977 3149.0 3506.2         6.6840  0.02517 3133.6 3486.0      6.5941
                             600 0.03164 3228.7 3608.3         6.8037  0.02683 3215.4 3591.1      6.7172
                             640 0.03345 3307.5 3709.0         6.9164  0.02843 3296.0 3694.1      6.8326

                             700 0.03610 3425.2 3858.4 7.0749          0.03075 3415.7 3846.2 6.9939
                             740 0.03781 3503.7 3957.4 7.1746          0.03225 3495.2 3946.7 7.0952
                                                                    Tables in SI Units 727

TABLE A-4 (Continued)

T  v  u                h    s         v      u    h              s
                                    m3/kg  kJ/kg
C m3/kg kJ/kg kJ/kg kJ/kg # K                     kJ/kg kJ/kg # K

      p  160 bar  16.0 MPa                 p  180 bar  18.0 MPa
          (Tsat  347.44C)                      (Tsat  357.06C)

Sat. 0.00931 2431.7 2580.6  5.2455  0.00749 2374.3 2509.1  5.1044                           H2O
360 0.01105 2539.0 2715.8   5.4614  0.00809 2418.9 2564.5  5.1922
400 0.01426 2719.4 2947.6   5.8175  0.01190 2672.8 2887.0  5.6887

440 0.01652 2839.4 3103.7   6.0429  0.01414 2808.2 3062.8  5.9428
480 0.01842 2939.7 3234.4   6.2215  0.01596 2915.9 3203.2  6.1345
520 0.02013 3031.1 3353.3   6.3752  0.01757 3011.8 3378.0  6.2960

560 0.02172 3117.8 3465.4   6.5132  0.01904 3101.7 3444.4  6.4392
600 0.02323 3201.8 3573.5   6.6399  0.02042 3188.0 3555.6  6.5696
640 0.02467 3284.2 3678.9   6.7580  0.02174 3272.3 3663.6  6.6905

700 0.02674 3406.0 3833.9 6.9224    0.02362 3396.3 3821.5 6.8580
740 0.02808 3486.7 3935.9 7.0251    0.02483 3478.0 3925.0 6.9623

      p  200 bar  20.0 MPa                 p  240 bar  24.0 MPa
          (Tsat  365.81C)

Sat. 0.00583 2293.0 2409.7  4.9269  0.00673 2477.8 2639.4  5.2393
400 0.00994 2619.3 2818.1   5.5540  0.00929 2700.6 2923.4  5.6506
440 0.01222 2774.9 3019.4   5.8450
                                    0.01100 2838.3 3102.3  5.8950
480 0.01399 2891.2 3170.8   6.0518  0.01241 2950.5 3248.5  6.0842
520 0.01551 2992.0 3302.2   6.2218  0.01366 3051.1 3379.0  6.2448
560 0.01689 3085.2 3423.0   6.3705
                                    0.01481 3145.2 3500.7  6.3875
600 0.01818 3174.0 3537.6   6.5048  0.01588 3235.5 3616.7  6.5174
640 0.01940 3260.2 3648.1   6.6286  0.01739 3366.4 3783.8  6.6947
700 0.02113 3386.4 3809.0   6.7993
                                    0.01835 3451.7 3892.1  6.8038
740 0.02224 3469.3 3914.1 6.9052    0.01974 3578.0 4051.6  6.9567
800 0.02385 3592.7 4069.7 7.0544

      p  280 bar  28.0 MPa                 p  320 bar  32.0 MPa

400 0.00383 2223.5 2330.7   4.7494  0.00236 1980.4 2055.9  4.3239
440 0.00712 2613.2 2812.6   5.4494  0.00544 2509.0 2683.0  5.2327
480 0.00885 2780.8 3028.5   5.7446  0.00722 2718.1 2949.2  5.5968

520 0.01020 2906.8 3192.3   5.9566  0.00853 2860.7 3133.7  5.8357
560 0.01136 3015.7 3333.7   6.1307  0.00963 2979.0 3287.2  6.0246
600 0.01241 3115.6 3463.0   6.2823  0.01061 3085.3 3424.6  6.1858

640 0.01338 3210.3 3584.8   6.4187  0.01150 3184.5 3552.5  6.3290
700 0.01473 3346.1 3758.4   6.6029  0.01273 3325.4 3732.8  6.5203
740 0.01558 3433.9 3870.0   6.7153  0.01350 3415.9 3847.8  6.6361

800 0.01680 3563.1 4033.4 6.8720    0.01460 3548.0 4015.1 6.7966
900 0.01873 3774.3 4298.8 7.1084    0.01633 3762.7 4285.1 7.0372
     728 Tables in SI Units

                             TABLE A-5 Properties of Compressed Liquid Water

                             T v  103       u     h             s             v  103    u     h             s
                             C m3/kg      kJ/kg                                m3/kg  kJ/kg
                                                  kJ/kg kJ/kg # K                             kJ/kg kJ/kg # K

                                          p  25 bar  2.5 MPa                          p  50 bar  5.0 MPa
                                             (Tsat  223.99C)                             (Tsat  263.99C)

H2O                          20 1.0006     83.80   86.30         .2961         .9995   83.65   88.65         .2956
                             40 1.0067    167.25  169.77         .5715        1.0056  166.95  171.97         .5705
                             80 1.0280    334.29  336.86        1.0737        1.0268  333.72  338.85        1.0720

                             100 1.0423   418.24  420.85        1.3050        1.0410  417.52  422.72        1.3030
                             140 1.0784   587.82  590.52        1.7369        1.0768  586.76  592.15        1.7343
                             180 1.1261   761.16  763.97        2.1375        1.1240  759.63  765.25        2.1341

                             200 1.1555   849.9   852.8         2.3294        1.1530   848.1   853.9        2.3255
                             220 1.1898   940.7   943.7         2.5174        1.1866   938.4   944.4        2.5128
                             Sat. 1.1973  959.1   962.1         2.5546        1.2859  1147.8  1154.2        2.9202

                                          p  75 bar  7.5 MPa                          p  100 bar  10.0 MPa
                                             (Tsat  290.59C)                              (Tsat  311.06C)

                             20 .9984      83.50   90.99         .2950         .9972   83.36   93.33         .2945
                             40 1.0045    166.64  174.18         .5696        1.0034  166.35  176.38         .5686
                             80 1.0256    333.15  340.84        1.0704        1.0245  332.59  342.83        1.0688

                             100 1.0397   416.81  424.62        1.3011        1.0385  416.12  426.50        1.2992
                             140 1.0752   585.72  593.78        1.7317        1.0737  584.68  595.42        1.7292
                             180 1.1219   758.13  766.55        2.1308        1.1199  756.65  767.84        2.1275

                             220 1.1835 936.2 945.1             2.5083        1.1805   934.1   945.9        2.5039
                             260 1.2696 1124.4 1134.0           2.8763        1.2645  1121.1  1133.7        2.8699
                             Sat. 1.3677 1282.0 1292.2          3.1649        1.4524  1393.0  1407.6        3.3596

                                          p  150 bar  15.0 MPa                        p  200 bar  20.0 MPa
                                              (Tsat  342.24C)                             (Tsat  365.81C)

                             20 .9950      83.06   97.99         .2934         .9928   82.77  102.62         .2923
                             40 1.0013    165.76  180.78         .5666         .9992  165.17  185.16         .5646
                             80 1.0222    331.48  346.81        1.0656        1.0199  330.40  350.80        1.0624

                             100 1.0361   414.74  430.28        1.2955        1.0337  413.39  434.06        1.2917
                             140 1.0707   582.66  598.72        1.7242        1.0678  580.69  602.04        1.7193
                             180 1.1159   753.76  770.50        2.1210        1.1120  750.95  773.20        2.1147

                             220 1.1748 929.9 947.5             2.4953        1.1693   925.9   949.3        2.4870
                             260 1.2550 1114.6 1133.4           2.8576        1.2462  1108.6  1133.5        2.8459
                             300 1.3770 1316.6 1337.3           3.2260        1.3596  1306.1  1333.3        3.2071
                             Sat. 1.6581 1585.6 1610.5          3.6848        2.036   1785.6  1826.3        4.0139

                                          p  250 bar  25 MPa                          p  300 bar  30.0 MPa

                              20 .9907     82.47  107.24         .2911         .9886   82.17  111.84         .2899
                              40 .9971    164.60  189.52         .5626         .9951  164.04  193.89         .5607
                             100 1.0313   412.08  437.85        1.2881        1.0290  410.78  441.66        1.2844

                             200 1.1344 834.5 862.8             2.2961        1.1302 831.4 865.3            2.2893
                             300 1.3442 1296.6 1330.2           3.1900        1.3304 1287.9 1327.8          3.1741
     TABLE A-6 Properties of Saturated Water (Solid­Vapor): Temperature Table

                      Specific Volume           Internal Energy                                                     Enthalpy                  Entropy
                            m3/kg                     kJ/kg                                                           kJ/kg                   kJ/kg # K

     Temp.  Pressure    Sat.    Sat.      Sat.   Subl.                          Sat.                          Sat.     Subl.   Sat.     Sat.    Subl.     Sat.
       C      kPa       Solid  Vapor     Solid    uig                          Vapor                         Solid       hig  Vapor    Solid      sig    Vapor
                      vi  103
      .01    .6113               vg        ui   2708.7                           ug                            hi     2834.8    hg       si    10.378       sg
         0   .6108     1.0908                   2708.8                                                                2834.8                   10.378
             .5176     1.0908  206.1   333.40   2710.2                         2375.3                      333.40     2835.3  2501.4  1.221    10.456     9.156
      2                1.0904  206.3   333.43                                  2375.3                      333.43             2501.3  1.221               9.157
                               241.7   337.62                                  2372.6                      337.62     2835.7  2497.7  1.237    10.536     9.219
                                                                                                                      2836.2                   10.616
     4      .4375     1.0901   283.8   341.78   2711.6                         2369.8                      341.78     2836.6  2494.0  1.253    10.698     9.283
                      1.0898   334.2   345.91   2712.9                         2367.0                      345.91             2490.3  1.268               9.348
     6      .3689     1.0894   394.4   350.02   2714.2                         2364.2                      350.02     2837.0  2486.6  1.284    10.781     9.414
                                                                                                                      2837.3                   10.865
     8      .3102                                                                                          354.09     2837.6  2482.9  1.299    10.950     9.481
                                                                                                           358.14             2479.2  1.315               9.550
     10     .2602     1.0891   466.7   354.09   2715.5                         2361.4                      362.15     2837.9  2475.5  1.331    11.036     9.619
                      1.0888   553.7   358.14   2716.8                         2358.7                                 2838.2                   11.123
     12     .2176     1.0884   658.8   362.15   2718.0                         2355.9                      366.14     2838.4  2471.8  1.346    11.212     9.690
                                                                                                           370.10             2468.1  1.362               9.762
     14     .1815                                                                                          374.03     2838.6  2464.3  1.377    11.302     9.835
                                                                                                                      2838.7                   11.394
     16     .1510     1.0881    786.0  366.14   2719.2                         2353.1                      377.93     2838.9  2460.6  1.393    11.486     9.909
                      1.0878    940.5  370.10   2720.4                         2350.3                      381.80             2456.9  1.408               9.985
     18     .1252     1.0874   1128.6  374.03   2721.6                         2347.5                      385.64     2839.0  2453.2  1.424    11.580    10.062
                                                                                                                      2839.0                   11.676
     20     .1035                                                                                          389.45     2839.1  2449.5  1.439    11.773    10.141
                                                                                                           393.23             2445.8  1.455              10.221
     22     .0853     1.0871   1358.4  377.93   2722.7                         2344.7                      396.98     2839.1  2442.1  1.471    11.872    10.303
                      1.0868   1640.1  381.80   2723.7                         2342.0                                 2839.1                   11.972
     24     .0701     1.0864   1986.4  385.64   2724.8                         2339.2                      400.71     2839.0  2438.4  1.486    12.073    10.386
                                                                                                           404.40     2838.9  2434.7  1.501    12.176    10.470
     26     .0574                                                                                          408.06             2430.9  1.517              10.556
                                                                                                           411.70             2427.2  1.532              10.644
     28     .0469     1.0861   2413.7  389.45   2725.8                         2336.4
                      1.0858   2943    393.23   2726.8                         2333.6
     30     .0381     1.0854   3600    396.98   2727.8                         2330.8

     32     .0309

     34     .0250     1.0851   4419    400.71   2728.7                         2328.0
                      1.0848   5444    404.40   2729.6                         2325.2
     36     .0201     1.0844   6731    408.06   2730.5                         2322.4
                      1.0841   8354    411.70   2731.3                         2319.6
     38     .0161

     40     .0129

     Source: J. H. Keenan, F. G. Keyes, P. G. Hill, and J. G. Moore, Steam Tables, Wiley, New York, 1978.

729

                                                                                                                                      H2O
      730 Tables in SI Units

      TABLE A-7 Properties of Saturated Refrigerant 22 (Liquid­Vapor): Temperature Table

                     Specific Volume  Internal Energy             Enthalpy                        Entropy
                           m3/kg            kJ/kg                   kJ/kg                         kJ/kg # K

R-22  Temp.  Press.     Sat.   Sat.     Sat.     Sat.     Sat.    Evap.                    Sat.      Sat.    Sat.                      Temp.
        C     bar     Liquid  Vapor   Liquid    Vapor   Liquid      hfg                   Vapor    Liquid   Vapor                        C
                     vf  103
       60    0.3749             vg       uf       ug       hf     245.35                    hg        sf       sg                       60
       50    0.6451   0.6833                                      239.44                                                                50
       45    0.8290   0.6966  0.5370  21.57     203.67  21.55     236.39                  223.81  0.0964    1.0547                      45
       40    1.0522   0.7037  0.3239  10.89     207.70  10.85     233.27                  228.60  0.0474    1.0256                      40
       36    1.2627   0.7109  0.2564            209.70            230.71                  230.95  0.0235    1.0126                      36
       32    1.5049   0.7169  0.2052   5.50     211.68   5.44     228.10                  233.27            1.0005                      32
                      0.7231  0.1730   0.07     213.25      0.00                          235.09    0.0000  0.9914
                              0.1468            214.80      4.38                          236.89    0.0186  0.9828                      30
                                          4.29              8.79                                    0.0369                              28
                                          8.68                                                                                          26
                                                                                                                                        22
      30 1.6389 0.7262 0.1355 10.88 215.58 11.00 226.77 237.78 0.0460 0.9787                                                            20
      28 1.7819 0.7294 0.1252 13.09 216.34 13.22 225.43 238.66 0.0551 0.9746
      26 1.9345 0.7327 0.1159 15.31 217.11 15.45 224.08 239.53 0.0641 0.9707                                                            18
      22 2.2698 0.7393 0.0997 19.76 218.62 19.92 221.32 241.24 0.0819 0.9631                                                            16
      20 2.4534 0.7427 0.0926 21.99 219.37 22.17 219.91 242.09 0.0908 0.9595                                                            14
                                                                                                                                        12
      18 2.6482 0.7462 0.0861 24.23 220.11 24.43 218.49 242.92 0.0996 0.9559                                                            10
      16 2.8547 0.7497 0.0802 26.48 220.85 26.69 217.05 243.74 0.1084 0.9525
      14 3.0733 0.7533 0.0748 28.73 221.58 28.97 215.59 244.56 0.1171 0.9490                                                             8
      12 3.3044 0.7569 0.0698 31.00 222.30 31.25 214.11 245.36 0.1258 0.9457                                                             6
      10 3.5485 0.7606 0.0652 33.27 223.02 33.54 212.62 246.15 0.1345 0.9424                                                             4
                                                                                                                                         2
      8 3.8062 0.7644 0.0610 35.54 223.73 35.83 211.10 246.93 0.1431 0.9392
      6 4.0777 0.7683 0.0571 37.83 224.43 38.14 209.56 247.70 0.1517 0.9361                                                                 0
      4 4.3638 0.7722 0.0535 40.12 225.13 40.46 208.00 248.45 0.1602 0.9330
      2 4.6647 0.7762 0.0501 42.42 225.82 42.78 206.41 249.20 0.1688 0.9300                                                                 2
                                                                                                                                            4
        0 4.9811 0.7803 0.0470 44.73 226.50 45.12 204.81 249.92 0.1773 0.9271                                                               6
                                                                                                                                            8
       2 5.3133 0.7844 0.0442 47.04 227.17 47.46 203.18 250.64 0.1857 0.9241                                                              10
       4 5.6619 0.7887 0.0415 49.37 227.83 49.82 201.52 251.34 0.1941 0.9213
       6 6.0275 0.7930 0.0391 51.71 228.48 52.18 199.84 252.03 0.2025 0.9184                                                              12
       8 6.4105 0.7974 0.0368 54.05 229.13 54.56 198.14 252.70 0.2109 0.9157                                                              16
      10 6.8113 0.8020 0.0346 56.40 229.76 56.95 196.40 253.35 0.2193 0.9129                                                              20
                                                                                                                                          24
      12 7.2307 0.8066 0.0326         58.77     230.38  59.35     194.64                  253.99  0.2276    0.9102                        28
      16 8.1268 0.8162 0.0291         63.53     231.59  64.19     191.02                  255.21  0.2442    0.9048
      20 9.1030 0.8263 0.0259         68.33     232.76  69.09     187.28                  256.37  0.2607    0.8996                        32
      24 10.164 0.8369 0.0232         73.19     233.87  74.04     183.40                  257.44  0.2772    0.8944                        36
      28 11.313 0.8480 0.0208         78.09     234.92  79.05     179.37                  258.43  0.2936    0.8893                        40
                                                                                                                                          45
      32 12.556      0.8599   0.0186   83.06    235.91   84.14    175.18                  259.32  0.3101    0.8842                        50
      36 13.897      0.8724   0.0168   88.08    236.83   89.29    170.82                  260.11  0.3265    0.8790                        60
      40 15.341      0.8858   0.0151   93.18    237.66   94.53    166.25                  260.79  0.3429    0.8738
      45 17.298      0.9039   0.0132   99.65    238.59  101.21    160.24                  261.46  0.3635    0.8672
      50 19.433      0.9238   0.0116  106.26    239.34  108.06    153.84                  261.90  0.3842    0.8603
      60 24.281      0.9705   0.0089  120.00    240.24  122.35    139.61                  261.96  0.4264    0.8455

      Source: Tables A-7 through A-9 are calculated based on equations from A. Kamei and S. W. Beyerlein, "A Fundamental Equation for
      Chlorodifluoromethane (R-22)," Fluid Phase Equilibria, Vol. 80, No. 11, 1992, pp. 71­86.
                                                                                         Tables in SI Units 731

TABLE A-8 Properties of Saturated Refrigerant 22 (Liquid­Vapor): Pressure Table

               Specific Volume  Internal Energy          Enthalpy                        Entropy
                     m3/kg            kJ/kg                kJ/kg                         kJ/kg # K

Press.  Temp.     Sat.   Sat.    Sat.    Sat.      Sat.    Evap.                  Sat.    Sat.      Sat.   Press.
 bar       C            Vapor   Liquid  Vapor    Liquid      hfg                 Vapor   Liquid    Vapor    bar
                Liquid
 0.40   58.86  vf  103    vg      uf      ug        hf    244.69                   hg       sf       sg     0.40
 0.50   54.83                                             242.33                                            0.50
 0.60   51.40  0.6847   0.5056  20.36   204.13   20.34    240.28                 224.36  0.0907    1.0512   0.60
 0.70   48.40  0.6901   0.4107  16.07   205.76   16.03    238.47                 226.30  0.0709    1.0391   0.70
 0.80   45.73  0.6947   0.3466  12.39   207.14   12.35    236.84                 227.93  0.0542    1.0294   0.80
 0.90   43.30  0.6989   0.3002          208.34            235.34                 229.35  0.0397    1.0213   0.90
               0.7026   0.2650   9.17   209.41    9.12                           230.61  0.0270    1.0144
               0.7061   0.2374   6.28   210.37    6.23                           231.74  0.0155    1.0084   1.00
                                 3.66             3.60                                                      1.25
                                                                                 232.77                     1.50
1.00 41.09     0.7093   0.2152  1.26    211.25   1.19    233.95                  234.99  0.0051    1.0031   1.75   R-22
1.25 36.23     0.7166   0.1746    4.04  213.16     4.13  230.86                  236.86    0.0175  0.9919   2.00
1.50 32.08     0.7230   0.1472    8.60  214.77     8.70  228.15                  238.47    0.0366  0.9830
1.75 28.44     0.7287   0.1274          216.18           225.73                  239.88    0.0531  0.9755   2.25
2.00 25.18     0.7340   0.1123   12.61  217.42    12.74  223.52                            0.0678  0.9691   2.50
                                 16.22            16.37                          241.15                     2.75
                                                                                 242.29                     3.00
2.25 22.22     0.7389   0.1005  19.51   218.53   19.67   221.47                  243.33  0.0809    0.9636   3.25
2.50 19.51     0.7436   0.0910  22.54   219.55   22.72   219.57                  244.29  0.0930    0.9586
2.75 17.00     0.7479   0.0831  25.36   220.48   25.56   217.77                  245.18  0.1040    0.9542   3.50
3.00 14.66     0.7521   0.0765  27.99   221.34   28.22   216.07                          0.1143    0.9502   3.75
3.25 12.46     0.7561   0.0709  30.47   222.13   30.72   214.46                  246.00  0.1238    0.9465   4.00
                                                                                 246.77                     4.25
3.50 10.39     0.7599   0.0661  32.82   222.88   33.09   212.91                  247.48  0.1328    0.9431   4.50
3.75 8.43      0.7636   0.0618  35.06   223.58   35.34   211.42                  248.16  0.1413    0.9399
4.00 6.56      0.7672   0.0581  37.18   224.24   37.49   209.99                  248.80  0.1493    0.9370   4.75
4.25 4.78      0.7706   0.0548  39.22   224.86   39.55   208.61                          0.1569    0.9342   5.00
4.50 3.08      0.7740   0.0519  41.17   225.45   41.52   207.27                  249.40  0.1642    0.9316   5.25
                                                                                 249.97                     5.50
4.75 1.45 0.7773 0.0492         43.05   226.00   43.42   205.98                  250.51  0.1711    0.9292   5.75
                                44.86   226.54   45.25   204.71                  251.02  0.1777    0.9269
5.00    0.12 0.7805 0.0469      46.61   227.04   47.02   203.48                  251.51  0.1841    0.9247   6.00
                                48.30   227.53   48.74   202.28                          0.1903    0.9226   7.00
5.25    1.63 0.7836 0.0447      49.94   227.99   50.40   201.11                  251.98  0.1962    0.9206   8.00
                                                                                 253.64                     9.00
5.50    3.08 0.7867 0.0427                                                       255.05                    10.00
                                                                                 256.25
5.75    4.49 0.7897 0.0409                                                       257.28                    12.00
                                                                                                           14.00
 6.00    5.85  0.7927   0.0392  51.53   228.44   52.01   199.97                  258.94  0.2019    0.9186  16.00
 7.00   10.91  0.8041   0.0337  57.48   230.04   58.04   195.60                  260.16  0.2231    0.9117  18.00
 8.00   15.45  0.8149   0.0295  62.88   231.43   63.53   191.52                  261.04  0.2419    0.9056  20.00
 9.00   19.59  0.8252   0.0262  67.84   232.64   68.59   187.67                  261.64  0.2591    0.9001  24.00
10.00   23.40  0.8352   0.0236  72.46   233.71   73.30   183.99                  261.98  0.2748    0.8952
                                                                                 261.99
12.00   30.25  0.8546   0.0195   80.87  235.48    81.90  177.04                          0.3029    0.8864
14.00   36.29  0.8734   0.0166   88.45  236.89    89.68  170.49                          0.3277    0.8786
16.00   41.73  0.8919   0.0144   95.41  238.00    96.83  164.21                          0.3500    0.8715
18.00   46.69  0.9104   0.0127  101.87  238.86   103.51  158.13                          0.3705    0.8649
20.00   51.26  0.9291   0.0112  107.95  239.51   109.81  152.17                          0.3895    0.8586
24.00   59.46  0.9677   0.0091  119.24  240.22   121.56  140.43                          0.4241    0.8463
      732 Tables in SI Units

                              TABLE A-9 Properties of Superheated Refrigerant 22 Vapor

                              T  v         u       h       s         v                    u     h             s
                                                                   m3/kg                kJ/kg
                              C m3/kg kJ/kg kJ/kg kJ/kg # K                                     kJ/kg kJ/kg # K

                                    p  0.4 bar  0.04 MPa                                p  0.6 bar  0.06 MPa
                                        (Tsat  58.86C)                                      (Tsat  51.40C)

                              Sat. 0.50559 204.13 224.36   1.0512  0.34656 207.14 227.93 1.0294
                              55 0.51532 205.92 226.53     1.0612
R-22                          50 0.52787 208.26 229.38     1.0741  0.34895              207.80  228.74  1.0330

                              45 0.54037 210.63 232.24     1.0868  0.35747              210.20  231.65  1.0459
                              40 0.55284 213.02 235.13     1.0993  0.36594              212.62  234.58  1.0586
                              35 0.56526 215.43 238.05     1.1117  0.37437              215.06  237.52  1.0711

                              30 0.57766 217.88 240.99     1.1239  0.38277              217.53  240.49  1.0835
                              25 0.59002 220.35 243.95     1.1360  0.39114              220.02  243.49  1.0956
                              20 0.60236 222.85 246.95     1.1479  0.39948              222.54  246.51  1.1077

                              15 0.61468 225.38 249.97     1.1597  0.40779              225.08  249.55  1.1196
                              10 0.62697 227.93 253.01     1.1714  0.41608              227.65  252.62  1.1314
                               5 0.63925 230.52 256.09     1.1830  0.42436              230.25  255.71  1.1430
                                                           1.1944  0.43261              232.88  258.83  1.1545
                                 0 0.65151 233.13 259.19

                                    p  0.8 bar  0.08 MPa                    p  1.0 bar  0.10 MPa
                                        (Tsat  45.73C)                          (Tsat  41.09C)

                              Sat. 0.26503 209.41 230.61   1.0144  0.21518 211.25 232.77 1.0031
                              45 0.26597 209.76 231.04     1.0163
                              40 0.27245 212.21 234.01     1.0292  0.21633              211.79  233.42  1.0059

                              35 0.27890   214.68  236.99  1.0418  0.22158              214.29  236.44  1.0187
                              30 0.28530   217.17  239.99  1.0543  0.22679              216.80  239.48  1.0313
                              25 0.29167   219.68  243.02  1.0666  0.23197              219.34  242.54  1.0438

                              20 0.29801   222.22  246.06  1.0788  0.23712              221.90  245.61  1.0560
                              15 0.30433   224.78  249.13  1.0908  0.24224              224.48  248.70  1.0681
                              10 0.31062   227.37  252.22  1.1026  0.24734              227.08  251.82  1.0801

                              5 0.31690    229.98  255.34  1.1143  0.25241              229.71  254.95  1.0919
                                0 0.32315  232.62  258.47  1.1259  0.25747              232.36  258.11  1.1035
                                5 0.32939  235.29  261.64  1.1374  0.26251              235.04  261.29  1.1151
                               10 0.33561  237.98  264.83  1.1488  0.26753              237.74  264.50  1.1265

                                    p  1.5 bar  0.15 MPa                    p  2.0 bar  0.20 MPa
                                        (Tsat  32.08C)                          (Tsat  25.18C)

                              Sat. 0.14721 214.77 236.86   0.9830  0.11232 217.42 239.88 0.9691
                              30 0.14872 215.85 238.16     0.9883
                              25 0.15232 218.45 241.30     1.0011  0.11242              217.51  240.00  0.9696

                              20 0.15588   221.07  244.45  1.0137  0.11520              220.19  243.23  0.9825
                              15 0.15941   223.70  247.61  1.0260  0.11795              222.88  246.47  0.9952
                              10 0.16292   226.35  250.78  1.0382  0.12067              225.58  249.72  1.0076

                              5 0.16640    229.02  253.98  1.0502  0.12336              228.30  252.97  1.0199
                                0 0.16987  231.70  257.18  1.0621  0.12603              231.03  256.23  1.0310
                                5 0.17331  234.42  260.41  1.0738  0.12868              233.78  259.51  1.0438

                              10 0.17674   237.15  263.66  1.0854  0.13132              236.54  262.81  1.0555
                              15 0.18015   239.91  266.93  1.0968  0.13393              239.33  266.12  1.0671
                              20 0.18355   242.69  270.22  1.1081  0.13653              242.14  269.44  1.0786
                              25 0.18693   245.49  273.53  1.1193  0.13912              244.97  272.79  1.0899
                                                                       Tables in SI Units 733

TABLE A-9 (Continued)

T  v  u                h     s         v        u     h             s
                                     m3/kg    kJ/kg
C m3/kg kJ/kg kJ/kg kJ/kg # K                         kJ/kg kJ/kg # K

      p  2.5 bar  0.25 MPa                    p  3.0 bar  0.30 MPa
          (Tsat  19.51C)                          (Tsat  14.66C)

Sat. 0.09097 219.55 242.29   0.9586  0.07651 221.34 244.29 0.9502
15 0.09303 222.03 245.29     0.9703
10 0.09528 224.79 248.61     0.9831  0.07833  223.96  247.46  0.9623

 5 0.09751 227.55 251.93     0.9956  0.08025  226.78  250.86  0.9751
    0 0.09971 230.33 255.26  1.0078  0.08214  229.61  254.25  0.9876
    5 0.10189 233.12 258.59  1.0199  0.08400  232.44  257.64  0.9999

10 0.10405 235.92 261.93     1.0318  0.08585  235.28  261.04  1.0120                           R-22
15 0.10619 238.74 265.29     1.0436  0.08767  238.14  264.44  1.0239
20 0.10831 241.58 268.66     1.0552  0.08949  241.01  267.85  1.0357

25 0.11043 244.44 272.04     1.0666  0.09128  243.89  271.28  1.0472
30 0.11253 247.31 275.44     1.0779  0.09307  246.80  274.72  1.0587
35 0.11461 250.21 278.86     1.0891  0.09484  249.72  278.17  1.0700
40 0.11669 253.13 282.30     1.1002  0.09660  252.66  281.64  1.0811

      p  3.5 bar  0.35 MPa                    p  4.0 bar  0.40 MPa
          (Tsat  10.39C)                           (Tsat  6.56C)

Sat. 0.06605 222.88 246.00   0.9431  0.05812 224.24 247.48 0.9370
10 0.06619 223.10 246.27     0.9441
 5 0.06789 225.99 249.75     0.9572  0.05860  225.16  248.60  0.9411

 0 0.06956 228.86 253.21     0.9700  0.06011  228.09  252.14  0.9542
 5 0.07121 231.74 256.67     0.9825  0.06160  231.02  225.66  0.9670
10 0.07284 234.63 260.12     0.9948  0.06306  233.95  259.18  0.9795

15 0.07444 237.52 263.57     1.0069  0.06450  236.89  262.69  0.9918
20 0.07603 240.42 267.03     1.0188  0.06592  239.83  266.19  1.0039
25 0.07760 243.34 270.50     1.0305  0.06733  242.77  269.71  1.0158

30 0.07916 246.27 273.97     1.0421  0.06872  245.73  273.22  1.0274
35 0.08070 249.22 227.46     1.0535  0.07010  248.71  276.75  1.0390
40 0.08224 252.18 280.97     1.0648  0.07146  251.70  280.28  1.0504
45 0.08376 255.17 284.48     1.0759  0.07282  254.70  283.83  1.0616

      p  4.5 bar  0.45 MPa                    p  5.0 bar  0.50 MPa
          (Tsat  3.08C)                              (Tsat  0.12C)

Sat. 0.05189 225.45 248.80   0.9316  0.04686 226.54 249.97 0.9269
   0 0.05275 227.29 251.03   0.9399
   5 0.05411 230.28 254.63   0.9529  0.04810  229.52  253.57  0.9399

10 0.05545 233.26 258.21     0.9657  0.04934  232.55  257.22  0.9530
15 0.05676 236.24 261.78     0.9782  0.05056  235.57  260.85  0.9657
20 0.05805 239.22 265.34     0.9904  0.05175  238.59  264.47  0.9781

25 0.05933 242.20 268.90     1.0025  0.05293  241.61  268.07  0.9903
30 0.06059 245.19 272.46     1.0143  0.05409  244.63  271.68  1.0023
35 0.06184 248.19 276.02     1.0259  0.05523  247.66  275.28  1.0141

40 0.06308 251.20 279.59     1.0374  0.05636  250.70  278.89  1.0257
45 0.06430 254.23 283.17     1.0488  0.05748  253.76  282.50  1.0371
50 0.06552 257.28 286.76     1.0600  0.05859  256.82  286.12  1.0484
55 0.06672 260.34 290.36     1.0710  0.05969  259.90  289.75  1.0595
      734 Tables in SI Units

                              TABLE A-9 (Continued)

                              T  v  u                h    s         v        u     h             s
                                                                  m3/kg    kJ/kg
                              C m3/kg kJ/kg kJ/kg kJ/kg # K                        kJ/kg kJ/kg # K

                                    p  5.5 bar  0.55 MPa                   p  6.0 bar  0.60 MPa
                                          (Tsat  3.08C)                          (Tsat  5.85C)

                              Sat. 0.04271 227.53 251.02  0.9226  0.03923 228.44 251.98 0.9186
                                 5 0.04317 228.72 252.46  0.9278
R-22                           10 0.04433 231.81 256.20   0.9411  0.04015  231.05  255.14  0.9299
                               15 0.04547 234.89 259.90   0.9540  0.04122  234.18  258.91  0.9431

                               20 0.04658 237.95 263.57   0.9667  0.04227  237.29  262.65  0.9560
                               25 0.04768 241.01 267.23   0.9790  0.04330  240.39  266.37  0.9685
                               30 0.04875 244.07 270.88   0.9912  0.04431  243.49  270.07  0.9808

                               35 0.04982 247.13 274.53   1.0031  0.04530  246.58  273.76  0.9929
                               40 0.05086 250.20 278.17   1.0148  0.04628  249.68  277.45  1.0048
                               45 0.05190 253.27 281.82   1.0264  0.04724  252.78  281.13  1.0164

                               50 0.05293 256.36 285.47   1.0378  0.04820  255.90  284.82  1.0279
                               55 0.05394 259.46 289.13   1.0490  0.04914  259.02  288.51  1.0393
                               60 0.05495 262.58 292.80   1.0601  0.05008  262.15  292.20  1.0504

                                    p  7.0 bar  0.70 MPa                   p  8.0 bar  0.80 MPa
                                         (Tsat  10.91C)                          (Tsat  15.45C)

                              Sat. 0.03371 230.04 253.64  0.9117  0.02953 231.43 255.05 0.9056
                               15 0.03451 232.70 256.86   0.9229
                               20 0.03547 235.92 260.75   0.9363  0.03033  234.47  258.74  0.9182

                              25 0.03639 239.12 264.59    0.9493  0.03118  237.76  262.70  0.9315
                              30 0.03730 242.29 268.40    0.9619  0.03202  241.04  266.66  0.9448
                              35 0.03819 245.46 272.19    0.9743  0.03283  244.28  270.54  0.9574

                              40 0.03906 248.62 275.96    0.9865  0.03363  247.52  274.42  0.9700
                              45 0.03992 251.78 279.72    0.9984  0.03440  250.74  278.26  0.9821
                              50 0.04076 254.94 283.48    1.0101  0.03517  253.96  282.10  0.9941

                              55 0.04160 258.11 287.23    1.0216  0.03592  257.18  285.92  1.0058
                              60 0.04242 261.29 290.99    1.0330  0.03667  260.40  289.74  1.0174
                              65 0.04324 264.48 294.75    1.0442  0.03741  263.64  293.56  1.0287
                              70 0.04405 267.68 298.51    1.0552  0.03814  266.87  297.38  1.0400

                                    p  9.0 bar  0.90 MPa                   p  10.0 bar  1.00 MPa
                                         (Tsat  19.59C)                          (Tsat  23.40C)

                              Sat. 0.02623 232.64 256.25  0.9001  0.02358 233.71 257.28 0.8952
                               20 0.02630 232.92 256.59   0.9013
                               30 0.02789 239.73 264.83   0.9289  0.02457  238.34  262.91  0.9139

                              40 0.02939 246.37 272.82    0.9549  0.02598  245.18  271.17  0.9407
                              50 0.03082 252.95 280.68    0.9795  0.02732  251.90  279.22  0.9660
                              60 0.03219 259.49 288.46    1.0033  0.02860  258.56  287.15  0.9902

                              70 0.03353 266.04 296.21    1.0262  0.02984  265.19  295.03  1.0135
                              80 0.03483 272.62 303.96    1.0484  0.03104  271.84  302.88  1.0361
                              90 0.03611 279.23 311.73    1.0701  0.03221  278.52  310.74  1.0580

                              100 0.03736 285.90 319.53   1.0913  0.03337  285.24  318.61  1.0794
                              110 0.03860 292.63 327.37   1.1120  0.03450  292.02  326.52  1.1003
                              120 0.03982 299.42 335.26   1.1323  0.03562  298.85  334.46  1.1207

                              130 0.04103 306.28 343.21   1.1523  0.03672  305.74  342.46  1.1408
                              140 0.04223 313.21 351.22   1.1719  0.03781  312.70  350.51  1.1605
                              150 0.04342 320.21 359.29   1.1912  0.03889  319.74  358.63  1.1790
TABLE A-9 (Continued)

T  v  u                h     s        v        u     h             s
                                    m3/kg    kJ/kg
C m3/kg kJ/kg kJ/kg kJ/kg # K                        kJ/kg kJ/kg # K

      p  12.0 bar  1.20 MPa                p  14.0 bar  1.40 MPa
            (Tsat  30.25C)                       (Tsat  36.29C)

Sat. 0.01955 235.48 258.94  0.8864  0.01662  236.89  260.16  0.8786
 40 0.02083 242.63 267.62   0.9146  0.01708  239.78  263.70  0.8900
 50 0.02204 249.69 276.14   0.9413  0.01823  247.29  272.81  0.9186

60 0.02319 256.60 284.43    0.9666  0.01929  254.52  281.53  0.9452
70 0.02428 263.44 292.58    0.9907  0.02029  261.60  290.01  0.9703
80 0.02534 270.25 300.66    1.0139  0.02125  268.60  298.34  0.9942

 90 0.02636 277.07 308.70   1.0363  0.02217  275.56  306.60  1.0172        R-22
100 0.02736 283.90 316.73   1.0582  0.02306  282.52  314.80  1.0395
110 0.02834 290.77 324.78   1.0794  0.02393  289.49  323.00  1.0612

120 0.02930 297.69 332.85   1.1002  0.02478  296.50  331.19  1.0823
130 0.03024 304.65 340.95   1.1205  0.02562  303.55  339.41  1.1029
140 0.03118 311.68 349.09   1.1405  0.02644  310.64  347.65  1.1231

150 0.03210 318.77 357.29   1.1601  0.02725  317.79  355.94  1.1429
160 0.03301 325.92 365.54   1.1793  0.02805  324.99  364.26  1.1624
170 0.03392 333.14 373.84   1.1983  0.02884  332.26  372.64  1.1815

      p  16.0 bar  1.60 MPa                p  18.0 bar  1.80 MPa
            (Tsat  41.73C)                       (Tsat  46.69C)

Sat. 0.01440 238.00 261.04  0.8715  0.01265 238.86 261.64    0.8649
 50 0.01533 244.66 269.18   0.8971  0.01301 241.72 265.14    0.8758
 60 0.01634 252.29 278.43   0.9252  0.01401 249.86 275.09    0.9061

70 0.01728 259.65 287.30    0.9515  0.01492 257.57 284.43    0.9337
80 0.01817 266.86 295.93    0.9762  0.01576 265.04 293.40    0.9595
90 0.01901 274.00 304.42    0.9999  0.01655 272.37 302.16    0.9839

100 0.01983 281.09 312.82   1.0228  0.01731 279.62 310.77    1.0073
110 0.02062 288.18 321.17   1.0448  0.01804 286.83 319.30    1.0299
120 0.02139 295.28 329.51   1.0663  0.01874 294.04 327.78    1.0517

130 0.02214 302.41 337.84   1.0872  0.01943 301.26 336.24    1.0730
140 0.02288 309.58 346.19   1.1077  0.02011 308.50 344.70    1.0937
150 0.02361 316.79 354.56   1.1277  0.02077 315.78 353.17    1.1139

160 0.02432 324.05 362.97 1.1473    0.02142 323.10 361.66 1.1338
170 0.02503 331.37 371.42 1.1666    0.02207 330.47 370.19 1.1532

      p  20.0 bar  2.00 MPa                  p  24.0 bar  2.4 MPa
            (Tsat  51.26C)                        (Tsat  59.46C)

Sat. 0.01124 239.51 261.98  0.8586  0.00907 240.22 261.99    0.8463
  60 0.01212 247.20 271.43  0.8873  0.00913 240.78 262.68    0.8484
  70 0.01300 255.35 281.36  0.9167  0.01006 250.30 274.43    0.8831

 80 0.01381 263.12 290.74   0.9436  0.01085 258.89 284.93    0.9133
 90 0.01457 270.67 299.80   0.9689  0.01156 267.01 294.75    0.9407
100 0.01528 278.09 308.65   0.9929  0.01222 274.85 304.18    0.9663

110 0.01596 285.44 317.37   1.0160  0.01284 282.53 313.35    0.9906
120 0.01663 292.76 326.01   1.0383  0.01343 290.11 322.35    1.0137
130 0.01727 300.08 334.61   1.0598  0.01400 297.64 331.25    1.0361

140 0.01789 307.40 343.19   1.0808  0.01456 305.14 340.08    1.0577
150 0.01850 314.75 351.76   1.1013  0.01509 312.64 348.87    1.0787
160 0.01910 322.14 360.34   1.1214  0.01562 320.16 357.64    1.0992

170 0.01969 329.56 368.95 1.1410    0.01613 327.70 366.41 1.1192
180 0.02027 337.03 377.58 1.1603    0.01663 335.27 375.20 1.1388

                                                                      735
        736 Tables in SI Units

        TABLE A-10 Properties of Saturated Refrigerant 134a (Liquid­Vapor): Temperature Table

                                Specific Volume  Internal Energy          Enthalpy             Entropy
                                      m3/kg            kJ/kg                kJ/kg              kJ/kg # K

        Temp.  Press.     Sat.   Sat.             Sat.    Sat.     Sat.   Evap.      Sat.       Sat.    Sat.   Temp.
          C     bar     Liquid  Vapor            Liquid  Vapor    Liquid    hfg     Vapor      Liquid  Vapor     C
                       vf  103
         40    0.5164             vg               uf      ug       hf    222.88      hg          sf      sg    40
         36    0.6332   0.7055                                            220.67                                36
         32    0.7704   0.7113  0.3569           0.04    204.45     0.00  218.37    222.88     0.0000  0.9560   32
         28    0.9305   0.7172  0.2947             4.68  206.73     4.73  216.01    225.40     0.0201  0.9506   28
         26    1.0199   0.7233  0.2451             9.47  209.01     9.52  214.80    227.90     0.0401  0.9456   26
                        0.7265  0.2052            14.31  211.29    14.37            230.38     0.0600  0.9411
                                0.1882            16.75  212.43    16.82            231.62     0.0699  0.9390

        24     1.1160 0.7296 0.1728 19.21 213.57 19.29 213.57 232.85 0.0798 0.9370 24

        22     1.2192 0.7328 0.1590 21.68 214.70 21.77 212.32 234.08 0.0897 0.9351 22

        20     1.3299 0.7361 0.1464 24.17 215.84 24.26 211.05 235.31 0.0996 0.9332 20

        18     1.4483 0.7395 0.1350 26.67 216.97 26.77 209.76 236.53 0.1094 0.9315 18

        16     1.5748 0.7428 0.1247 29.18 218.10 29.30 208.45 237.74 0.1192 0.9298 16

R-134a  12     1.8540 0.7498 0.1068 34.25 220.36 34.39 205.77 240.15 0.1388 0.9267 12

        8      2.1704 0.7569 0.0919 39.38 222.60 39.54 203.00 242.54 0.1583 0.9239                                                               8

        4      2.5274 0.7644 0.0794 44.56 224.84 44.75 200.15 244.90 0.1777 0.9213                                                               4

        0 2.9282 0.7721 0.0689 49.79 227.06 50.02 197.21 247.23 0.1970 0.9190                                                                    0

        4 3.3765 0.7801 0.0600 55.08 229.27 55.35 194.19 249.53 0.2162 0.9169                                                                    4

        8 3.8756 0.7884 0.0525 60.43 231.46 60.73 191.07 251.80 0.2354 0.9150                                                                    8

        12 4.4294 0.7971 0.0460 65.83 233.63 66.18 187.85 254.03 0.2545 0.9132                                                                   12

        16 5.0416 0.8062 0.0405 71.29 235.78 71.69 184.52 256.22 0.2735 0.9116                                                                   16

        20 5.7160 0.8157 0.0358 76.80 237.91 77.26 181.09 258.36 0.2924 0.9102                                                                   20

        24 6.4566 0.8257 0.0317 82.37 240.01 82.90 177.55 260.45 0.3113 0.9089                                                                   24

        26 6.8530 0.8309 0.0298 85.18 241.05 85.75 175.73 261.48 0.3208 0.9082                                                                   26

        28 7.2675 0.8362 0.0281 88.00 242.08 88.61 173.89 262.50 0.3302 0.9076                                                                   28

        30 7.7006 0.8417 0.0265 90.84 243.10 91.49 172.00 263.50 0.3396 0.9070                                                                   30

        32 8.1528 0.8473 0.0250 93.70 244.12 94.39 170.09 264.48 0.3490 0.9064                                                                   32

        34 8.6247 0.8530 0.0236 96.58 245.12 97.31 168.14 265.45 0.3584 0.9058                                                                   34

        36 9.1168 0.8590 0.0223 99.47 246.11 100.25 166.15 266.40 0.3678 0.9053                                                                  36

        38 9.6298 0.8651 0.0210 102.38 247.09 103.21 164.12 267.33 0.3772 0.9047                                                                 38

        40 10.164      0.8714 0.0199 105.30 248.06 106.19 162.05 268.24 0.3866 0.9041                                                            40

        42 10.720      0.8780 0.0188 108.25 249.02 109.19 159.94 269.14 0.3960 0.9035                                                            42

        44 11.299      0.8847 0.0177 111.22 249.96 112.22 157.79 270.01 0.4054 0.9030                                                            44

        48 12.526      0.8989 0.0159 117.22 251.79 118.35 153.33 271.68 0.4243 0.9017                                                            48

        52 13.851      0.9142 0.0142 123.31 253.55 124.58 148.66 273.24 0.4432 0.9004                                                            52

        56 15.278      0.9308 0.0127 129.51 255.23 130.93 143.75 274.68 0.4622 0.8990                                                            56

        60 16.813      0.9488 0.0114 135.82 256.81 137.42 138.57 275.99 0.4814 0.8973                                                            60

         70 21.162     1.0027 0.0086 152.22 260.15 154.34 124.08 278.43 0.5302 0.8918                                                            70
         80 26.324
         90 32.435     1.0766 0.0064 169.88 262.14 172.71 106.41 279.12 0.5814 0.8827                                                            80
        100 39.742
                       1.1949 0.0046 189.82 261.34 193.69 82.63 276.32 0.6380 0.8655                                                             90

                       1.5443 0.0027 218.60 248.49 224.74 34.40 259.13 0.7196 0.8117 100

        Source: Tables A-10 through A-12 are calculated based on equations from D. P. Wilson and R. S. Basu, "Thermodynamic Properties of a New
        Stratospherically Safe Working Fluid--Refrigerant 134a," ASHRAE Trans., Vol. 94, Pt. 2, 1988, pp. 2095­2118.
                                                                                            Tables in SI Units 737

TABLE A-11 Properties of Saturated Refrigerant 134a (Liquid­Vapor): Pressure Table

               Specific Volume  Internal Energy          Enthalpy                           Entropy
                     m3/kg            kJ/kg                kJ/kg                            kJ/kg # K

Press.  Temp.     Sat.   Sat.    Sat.    Sat.     Sat.   Evap.                       Sat.    Sat.    Sat.   Press.
 bar       C    Liquid  Vapor   Liquid  Vapor    Liquid    hfg                      Vapor   Liquid  Vapor    bar
               vf  103
  0.6   37.07             vg      uf      ug       hf    221.27                       hg       sf      sg     0.6
  0.8   31.21   0.7097                                   217.92                                               0.8
  1.0   26.43   0.7184  0.3100    3.41  206.12     3.46  215.06                     224.72  0.0147  0.9520    1.0
  1.2   22.36   0.7258  0.2366   10.41  209.46    10.47  212.54                     228.39  0.0440  0.9447    1.2
  1.4   18.80   0.7323  0.1917   16.22  212.18    16.29  210.27                     231.35  0.0678  0.9395    1.4
                0.7381  0.1614   21.23  214.50    21.32                             233.86  0.0879  0.9354
                        0.1395   25.66  216.52    25.77                             236.04  0.1055  0.9322    1.6
                                                                                                              1.8
1.6 15.62      0.7435   0.1229  29.66   218.32   29.78   208.19                     237.97  0.1211  0.9295    2.0
1.8 12.73      0.7485   0.1098  33.31   219.94   33.45   206.26                     239.71  0.1352  0.9273    2.4
2.0 10.09      0.7532   0.0993  36.69   221.43   36.84   204.46                     241.30  0.1481  0.9253    2.8
2.4 5.37       0.7618   0.0834  42.77   224.07   42.95   201.14                     244.09  0.1710  0.9222
2.8 1.23       0.7697   0.0719  48.18   226.38   48.39   198.13                     246.52  0.1911  0.9197    3.2
                                                                                                              3.6
3.2     2.48 0.7770 0.0632 53.06 228.43 53.31 195.35 248.66                                 0.2089  0.9177    4.0   R-134a
                                                                                            0.2251  0.9160    5.0
3.6     5.84 0.7839 0.0564 57.54 230.28 57.82 192.76 250.58                                 0.2399  0.9145    6.0
                                                                                            0.2723  0.9117
4.0     8.93 0.7904 0.0509 61.69 231.97 62.00 190.32 252.32                                 0.2999  0.9097    7.0
                                                                                                              8.0
5.0     15.74 0.8056 0.0409 70.93 235.64 71.33 184.74 256.07                                                  9.0
                                                                                                            10.0
6.0     21.58 0.8196 0.0341 78.99 238.74 79.48 179.71 259.19                                                12.0

7.0     26.72 0.8328 0.0292 86.19 241.42 86.78 175.07 261.85                                0.3242  0.9080  14.0
                                                                                            0.3459  0.9066  16.0
8.0     31.33 0.8454 0.0255 92.75 243.78 93.42 170.73 264.15                                0.3656  0.9054  18.0
                                                                                            0.3838  0.9043  20.0
9.0     35.53 0.8576 0.0226 98.79 245.88 99.56 166.62 266.18                                0.4164  0.9023  25.0
                                                                                                            30.0
10.0    39.39 0.8695 0.0202 104.42 247.77 105.29 162.68 267.97

12.0    46.32 0.8928 0.0166 114.69 251.03 115.76 155.23 270.99

14.0    52.43 0.9159 0.0140 123.98 253.74 125.26 148.14 273.40                              0.4453  0.9003
                                                                                            0.4714  0.8982
16.0    57.92 0.9392 0.0121 132.52 256.00 134.02 141.31 275.33                              0.4954  0.8959
                                                                                            0.5178  0.8934
18.0    62.91 0.9631 0.0105 140.49 257.88 142.22 134.60 276.83                              0.5687  0.8854
                                                                                            0.6156  0.8735
20.0    67.49 0.9878 0.0093 148.02 259.41 149.99 127.95 277.94

25.0    77.59 1.0562 0.0069 165.48 261.84 168.12 111.06 279.17

30.0    86.22 1.1416 0.0053 181.88 262.16 185.30 92.71 278.01
        738 Tables in SI Units

                                TABLE A-12 Properties of Superheated Refrigerant 134a Vapor

                                T  v  u  h                   s         v                       u     h       s
                                                                     m3/kg                   kJ/kg
                                C m3/kg kJ/kg kJ/kg kJ/kg # K                                        kJ/kg kJ/kg # K

                                      p  0.6 bar  0.06 MPa                p  1.0 bar  0.10 MPa
                                          (Tsat  37.07C)                      (Tsat  26.43C)

                                Sat. 0.31003 206.12 224.72   0.9520  0.19170 212.18 231.35                   0.9395
                                20 0.33536 217.86 237.98     1.0062  0.19770 216.77 236.54                   0.9602
                                10 0.34992 224.97 245.96     1.0371  0.20686 224.01 244.70                   0.9918

                                 0 0.36433 232.24 254.10     1.0675  0.21587 231.41 252.99                   1.0227
                                10 0.37861 239.69 262.41     1.0973  0.22473 238.96 261.43                   1.0531
                                20 0.39279 247.32 270.89     1.1267  0.23349 246.67 270.02                   1.0829

                                30 0.40688 255.12 279.53     1.1557  0.24216 254.54 278.76                   1.1122
                                40 0.42091 263.10 288.35     1.1844  0.25076 262.58 287.66                   1.1411
                                50 0.43487 271.25 297.34     1.2126  0.25930 270.79 296.72                   1.1696

R-134a                          60 0.44879 279.58 306.51     1.2405  0.26779                 279.16  305.94  1.1977
                                70 0.46266 288.08 315.84     1.2681  0.27623                 287.70  315.32  1.2254
                                80 0.47650 296.75 325.34     1.2954  0.28464                 296.40  324.87  1.2528
                                90 0.49031 305.58 335.00     1.3224  0.29302                 305.27  334.57  1.2799

                                      p  1.4 bar  0.14 MPa                p  1.8 bar  0.18 MPa
                                          (Tsat  18.80C)                      (Tsat  12.73C)

                                Sat. 0.13945 216.52 236.04   0.9322  0.10983 219.94 239.71                   0.9273
                                10 0.14549 223.03 243.40     0.9606  0.11135 222.02 242.06                   0.9362
                                                             0.9922  0.11678 229.67 250.69                   0.9684
                                    0 0.15219 230.55 251.86

                                10 0.15875 238.21 260.43     1.0230  0.12207 237.44 259.41                   0.9998
                                20 0.16520 246.01 269.13     1.0532  0.12723 245.33 268.23                   1.0304
                                30 0.17155 253.96 277.97     1.0828  0.13230 253.36 277.17                   1.0604

                                40 0.17783 262.06 286.96     1.1120  0.13730 261.53 286.24                   1.0898
                                50 0.18404 270.32 296.09     1.1407  0.14222 269.85 295.45                   1.1187
                                60 0.19020 278.74 305.37     1.1690  0.14710 278.31 304.79                   1.1472

                                 70 0.19633 287.32 314.80    1.1969  0.15193                 286.93  314.28  1.1753
                                 80 0.20241 296.06 324.39    1.2244  0.15672                 295.71  323.92  1.2030
                                 90 0.20846 304.95 334.14    1.2516  0.16148                 304.63  333.70  1.2303
                                100 0.21449 314.01 344.04    1.2785  0.16622                 313.72  343.63  1.2573

                                      p  2.0 bar  0.20 MPa                p  2.4 bar  0.24 MPa
                                          (Tsat  10.09C)                       (Tsat  5.37C)

                                Sat. 0.09933 221.43 241.30   0.9253  0.08343 224.07 244.09 0.9222
                                10 0.09938 221.50 241.38     0.9256
                                                             0.9582  0.08574                 228.31  248.89  0.9399
                                    0 0.10438 229.23 250.10
                                                                     0.08993                 236.26  257.84  0.9721
                                10 0.10922 237.05 258.89     0.9898  0.09399                 244.30  266.85  1.0034
                                20 0.11394 244.99 267.78     1.0206  0.09794                 252.45  275.95  1.0339
                                30 0.11856 253.06 276.77     1.0508
                                                                     0.10181                 260.72  285.16  1.0637
                                40 0.12311 261.26 285.88     1.0804  0.10562                 269.12  294.47  1.0930
                                50 0.12758 269.61 295.12     1.1094  0.10937                 277.67  303.91  1.1218
                                60 0.13201 278.10 304.50     1.1380
                                                                     0.11307                 286.35  313.49  1.1501
                                 70 0.13639 286.74 314.02    1.1661  0.11674                 295.18  323.19  1.1780
                                 80 0.14073 295.53 323.68    1.1939  0.12037                 304.15  333.04  1.2055
                                 90 0.14504 304.47 333.48    1.2212  0.12398                 313.27  343.03  1.2326
                                100 0.14932 313.57 343.43    1.2483
TABLE A-12 (Continued)

T  v  u                 h   s         v        u     h         s
                                    m3/kg    kJ/kg
C m3/kg kJ/kg kJ/kg kJ/kg # K                        kJ/kg kJ/kg # K

      p  2.8 bar  0.28 MPa          p  3.2 bar  0.32 MPa
          (Tsat  1.23C)                  (Tsat  2.48C)

Sat. 0.07193 226.38 246.52  0.9197  0.06322 228.43 248.66 0.9177
   0 0.07240 227.37 247.64  0.9238
 10 0.07613 235.44 256.76   0.9566  0.06576  234.61  255.65    0.9427

20 0.07972 243.59 265.91    0.9883  0.06901  242.87  264.95    0.9749
30 0.08320 251.83 275.12    1.0192  0.07214  251.19  274.28    1.0062
40 0.08660 260.17 284.42    1.0494  0.07518  259.61  283.67    1.0367

50 0.08992 268.64 293.81    1.0789  0.07815  268.14  293.15    1.0665
60 0.09319 277.23 303.32    1.1079  0.08106  276.79  302.72    1.0957
70 0.09641 285.96 312.95    1.1364  0.08392  285.56  312.41    1.1243

 80 0.09960 294.82 322.71   1.1644  0.08674  294.46  322.22    1.1525
 90 0.10275 303.83 332.60   1.1920  0.08953  303.50  332.15    1.1802
100 0.10587 312.98 342.62   1.2193  0.09229  312.68  342.21    1.2076

110 0.10897 322.27 352.78 1.2461    0.09503  322.00  352.40    1.2345
120 0.11205 331.71 363.08 1.2727    0.09774  331.45  362.73    1.2611

      p  4.0 bar  0.40 MPa               p  5.0 bar  0.50 MPa               R-134a
            (Tsat  8.93C)                      (Tsat  15.74C)

Sat. 0.05089 231.97 252.32  0.9145  0.04086 235.64 256.07 0.9117
 10 0.05119 232.87 253.35   0.9182
 20 0.05397 241.37 262.96   0.9515  0.04188  239.40  260.34    0.9264

30 0.05662 249.89 272.54    0.9837  0.04416  248.20  270.28    0.9597
40 0.05917 258.47 282.14    1.0148  0.04633  256.99  280.16    0.9918
50 0.06164 267.13 291.79    1.0452  0.04842  265.83  290.04    1.0229

60 0.06405 275.89 301.51    1.0748  0.05043  274.73  299.95    1.0531
70 0.06641 284.75 311.32    1.1038  0.05240  283.72  309.92    1.0825
80 0.06873 293.73 321.23    1.1322  0.05432  292.80  319.96    1.1114

 90 0.07102 302.84 331.25   1.1602  0.05620  302.00  330.10    1.1397
100 0.07327 312.07 341.38   1.1878  0.05805  311.31  340.33    1.1675
110 0.07550 321.44 351.64   1.2149  0.05988  320.74  350.68    1.1949

120 0.07771 330.94 362.03   1.2417  0.06168  330.30  361.14    1.2218
130 0.07991 340.58 372.54   1.2681  0.06347  339.98  371.72    1.2484
140 0.08208 350.35 383.18   1.2941  0.06524  349.79  382.42    1.2746

      p  6.0 bar  0.60 MPa               p  7.0 bar  0.70 MPa
           (Tsat  21.58C)                      (Tsat  26.72C)

Sat. 0.03408 238.74 259.19  0.9097  0.02918 241.42 261.85      0.9080
 30 0.03581 246.41 267.89   0.9388  0.02979 244.51 265.37      0.9197
 40 0.03774 255.45 278.09   0.9719  0.03157 253.83 275.93      0.9539

50 0.03958 264.48 288.23    1.0037  0.03324 263.08 286.35      0.9867
60 0.04134 273.54 298.35    1.0346  0.03482 272.31 296.69      1.0182
70 0.04304 282.66 308.48    1.0645  0.03634 281.57 307.01      1.0487

 80 0.04469 291.86 318.67   1.0938  0.03781 290.88 317.35      1.0784
 90 0.04631 301.14 328.93   1.1225  0.03924 300.27 327.74      1.1074
100 0.04790 310.53 339.27   1.1505  0.04064 309.74 338.19      1.1358

110 0.04946 320.03 349.70   1.1781  0.04201 319.31 348.71      1.1637
120 0.05099 329.64 360.24   1.2053  0.04335 328.98 359.33      1.1910
130 0.05251 339.38 370.88   1.2320  0.04468 338.76 370.04      1.2179

140 0.05402 349.23 381.64   1.2584  0.04599 348.66 380.86      1.2444
150 0.05550 359.21 392.52   1.2844  0.04729 358.68 391.79      1.2706
160 0.05698 369.32 403.51   1.3100  0.04857 368.82 402.82      1.2963

                                                                       739
             TABLE A-12 (Continued)

             T  v  u                 h    s         v        u     h       s
                                                  m3/kg    kJ/kg
             C m3/kg kJ/kg kJ/kg kJ/kg # K                         kJ/kg kJ/kg # K

                   p  8.0 bar  0.80 MPa           p  9.0 bar  0.90 MPa
                        (Tsat  31.33C)                 (Tsat  35.53C)

             Sat. 0.02547 243.78 264.15   0.9066  0.02255  245.88  266.18  0.9054
               40 0.02691 252.13 273.66   0.9374  0.02325  250.32  271.25  0.9217
               50 0.02846 261.62 284.39   0.9711  0.02472  260.09  282.34  0.9566

               60 0.02992 271.04 294.98   1.0034  0.02609  269.72  293.21  0.9897
               70 0.03131 280.45 305.50   1.0345  0.02738  279.30  303.94  1.0214
               80 0.03264 289.89 316.00   1.0647  0.02861  288.87  314.62  1.0521

               90 0.03393 299.37 326.52   1.0940  0.02980  298.46  325.28  1.0819
             100 0.03519 308.93 337.08    1.1227  0.03095  308.11  335.96  1.1109
             110 0.03642 318.57 347.71    1.1508  0.03207  317.82  346.68  1.1392

             120 0.03762 328.31 358.40    1.1784  0.03316  327.62  357.47  1.1670
             130 0.03881 338.14 369.19    1.2055  0.03423  337.52  368.33  1.1943
             140 0.03997 348.09 380.07    1.2321  0.03529  347.51  379.27  1.2211

             150 0.04113 358.15 391.05    1.2584  0.03633  357.61  390.31  1.2475
             160 0.04227 368.32 402.14    1.2843  0.03736  367.82  401.44  1.2735
             170 0.04340 378.61 413.33    1.3098  0.03838  378.14  412.68  1.2992
             180 0.04452 389.02 424.63    1.3351  0.03939  388.57  424.02  1.3245

R-134a             p  10.0 bar  1.00 MPa               p  12.0 bar  1.20 MPa
                         (Tsat  39.39C)                      (Tsat  46.32C)

             Sat. 0.02020 247.77 267.97   0.9043  0.01663 251.03 270.99 0.9023
               40 0.02029 248.39 268.68   0.9066
               50 0.02171 258.48 280.19   0.9428  0.01712  254.98  275.52  0.9164

             60 0.02301 268.35 291.36     0.9768  0.01835  265.42  287.44  0.9527
             70 0.02423 278.11 302.34     1.0093  0.01947  275.59  298.96  0.9868
             80 0.02538 287.82 313.20     1.0405  0.02051  285.62  310.24  1.0192

              90 0.02649 297.53 324.01    1.0707  0.02150  295.59  321.39  1.0503
             100 0.02755 307.27 334.82    1.1000  0.02244  305.54  332.47  1.0804
             110 0.02858 317.06 345.65    1.1286  0.02335  315.50  343.52  1.1096

             120 0.02959 326.93 356.52    1.1567  0.02423  325.51  354.58  1.1381
             130 0.03058 336.88 367.46    1.1841  0.02508  335.58  365.68  1.1660
             140 0.03154 346.92 378.46    1.2111  0.02592  345.73  376.83  1.1933

             150 0.03250 357.06 389.56    1.2376  0.02674  355.95  388.04  1.2201
             160 0.03344 367.31 400.74    1.2638  0.02754  366.27  399.33  1.2465
             170 0.03436 377.66 412.02    1.2895  0.02834  376.69  410.70  1.2724
             180 0.03528 388.12 423.40    1.3149  0.02912  387.21  422.16  1.2980

                   p  14.0 bar  1.40 MPa          p  16.0 bar  1.60 MPa
                         (Tsat  52.43C)                 (Tsat  57.92C)

             Sat. 0.01405 253.74 273.40   0.9003  0.01208 256.00 275.33    0.8982
               60 0.01495 262.17 283.10   0.9297  0.01233 258.48 278.20    0.9069
               70 0.01603 272.87 295.31   0.9658  0.01340 269.89 291.33    0.9457

              80 0.01701 283.29 307.10    0.9997  0.01435 280.78 303.74    0.9813
              90 0.01792 293.55 318.63    1.0319  0.01521 291.39 315.72    1.0148
             100 0.01878 303.73 330.02    1.0628  0.01601 301.84 327.46    1.0467

             110 0.01960 313.88 341.32    1.0927  0.01677 312.20 339.04    1.0773
             120 0.02039 324.05 352.59    1.1218  0.01750 322.53 350.53    1.1069
             130 0.02115 334.25 363.86    1.1501  0.01820 332.87 361.99    1.1357

             140 0.02189 344.50 375.15    1.1777  0.01887 343.24 373.44    1.1638
             150 0.02262 354.82 386.49    1.2048  0.01953 353.66 384.91    1.1912
             160 0.02333 365.22 397.89    1.2315  0.02017 364.15 396.43    1.2181

             170 0.02403 375.71 409.36    1.2576  0.02080  374.71  407.99  1.2445
             180 0.02472 386.29 420.90    1.2834  0.02142  385.35  419.62  1.2704
             190 0.02541 396.96 432.53    1.3088  0.02203  396.08  431.33  1.2960
             200 0.02608 407.73 444.24    1.3338  0.02263  406.90  443.11  1.3212

        740
                                                                                       Tables in SI Units 741

TABLE A-13 Properties of Saturated Ammonia (Liquid­Vapor): Temperature Table

               Specific Volume  Internal Energy             Enthalpy                   Entropy
                     m3/kg            kJ/kg                   kJ/kg                    kJ/kg # K

Temp.  Press.     Sat.   Sat.     Sat.     Sat.     Sat.     Evap.              Sat.      Sat.    Sat.   Temp.
  C     bar     Liquid  Vapor   Liquid    Vapor   Liquid       hfg             Vapor    Liquid   Vapor     C
               vf  103
 50    0.4086             vg       uf       ug       hf     1416.20              hg        sf       sg    50
 45    0.5453   1.4245                                      1402.52                                       45
 40    0.7174   1.4367  2.6265  43.94    1264.99  43.88     1388.56           1372.32  0.1922    6.1543   40
 36    0.8850   1.4493  2.0060  22.03    1271.19  21.95     1377.17           1380.57  0.0951    6.0523   36
 32    1.0832   1.4597  1.5524           1277.20            1365.55           1388.56            5.9557   32
                1.4703  1.2757   0.10    1281.87      0.00                    1394.77    0.0000  5.8819
                        1.0561    17.47  1286.41    17.60                     1400.81    0.0747  5.8111
                                  35.09             35.25                                0.1484

30 1.1950 1.4757 0.9634 43.93 1288.63 44.10 1359.65 1403.75 0.1849 5.7767 30
28 1.3159 1.4812 0.8803 52.78 1290.82 52.97 1353.68 1406.66 0.2212 5.7430 28
26 1.4465 1.4867 0.8056 61.65 1292.97 61.86 1347.65 1409.51 0.2572 5.7100 26
22 1.7390 1.4980 0.6780 79.46 1297.18 79.72 1335.36 1415.08 0.3287 5.6457 22
20 1.9019 1.5038 0.6233 88.40 1299.23 88.68 1329.10 1417.79 0.3642 5.6144 20

18 2.0769 1.5096 0.5739 97.36 1301.25 97.68 1322.77 1420.45 0.3994 5.5837 18
16 2.2644 1.5155 0.5291 106.36 1303.23 106.70 1316.35 1423.05 0.4346 5.5536 16
14 2.4652 1.5215 0.4885 115.37 1305.17 115.75 1309.86 1425.61 0.4695 5.5239 14
12 2.6798 1.5276 0.4516 124.42 1307.08 124.83 1303.28 1428.11 0.5043 5.4948 12
10 2.9089 1.5338 0.4180 133.50 1308.95 133.94 1296.61 1430.55 0.5389 5.4662 10

8 3.1532 1.5400 0.3874 142.60 1310.78 143.09 1289.86 1432.95 0.5734 5.4380 8

6 3.4134 1.5464 0.3595 151.74 1312.57 152.26 1283.02 1435.28 0.6077 5.4103 6                                                                 Ammonia

4 3.6901 1.5528 0.3340 160.88 1314.32 161.46 1276.10 1437.56 0.6418 5.3831 4

2 3.9842 1.5594 0.3106 170.07 1316.04 170.69 1269.08 1439.78 0.6759 5.3562 2

0 4.2962 1.5660 0.2892 179.29 1317.71 179.96 1261.97 1441.94 0.7097 5.3298                               0

2 4.6270 1.5727 0.2695 188.53 1319.34 189.26 1254.77 1444.03 0.7435 5.3038                               2

4 4.9773 1.5796 0.2514 197.80 1320.92 198.59 1247.48 1446.07 0.7770 5.2781                               4

6 5.3479 1.5866 0.2348 207.10 1322.47 207.95 1240.09 1448.04 0.8105 5.2529                               6

8 5.7395 1.5936 0.2195 216.42 1323.96 217.34 1232.61 1449.94 0.8438 5.2279                               8

10 6.1529 1.6008 0.2054 225.77 1325.42 226.75 1225.03 1451.78 0.8769 5.2033                              10

12 6.5890 1.6081 0.1923 235.14 1326.82 236.20 1217.35 1453.55 0.9099 5.1791                              12

16 7.5324 1.6231 0.1691 253.95 1329.48 255.18 1201.70 1456.87 0.9755 5.1314                              16

20 8.5762 1.6386 0.1492 272.86 1331.94 274.26 1185.64 1459.90 1.0404 5.0849                              20

24 9.7274 1.6547 0.1320 291.84 1334.19 293.45 1169.16 1462.61 1.1048 5.0394                              24

28 10.993 1.6714 0.1172 310.92 1336.20 312.75 1152.24 1465.00 1.1686 4.9948                              28

32 12.380 1.6887 0.1043 330.07 1337.97 332.17 1134.87 1467.03 1.2319 4.9509                              32

36 13.896 1.7068 0.0930 349.32 1339.47 351.69 1117.00 1468.70 1.2946 4.9078                              36

40 15.549 1.7256 0.0831 368.67 1340.70 371.35 1098.62 1469.97 1.3569 4.8652                              40

45 17.819 1.7503 0.0725 393.01 1341.81 396.13 1074.84 1470.96 1.4341 4.8125                              45

50 20.331 1.7765 0.0634 417.56 1342.42 421.17 1050.09 1471.26 1.5109 4.7604                              50

Source: Tables A-13 through A-15 are calculated based on equations from L. Haar and J. S. Gallagher, "Thermodynamic Properties of Ammonia,"
J. Phys. Chem. Reference Data, Vol. 7, 1978, pp. 635­792.
         742 Tables in SI Units

         TABLE A-14 Properties of Saturated Ammonia (Liquid­Vapor): Pressure Table

                        Specific Volume  Internal Energy              Enthalpy               Entropy
                              m3/kg            kJ/kg                    kJ/kg                kJ/kg # K

         Press.  Temp.     Sat.   Sat.     Sat.      Sat.     Sat.     Evap.          Sat.      Sat.    Sat.   Press.
          bar       C    Liquid  Vapor   Liquid     Vapor   Liquid       hfg         Vapor    Liquid   Vapor    bar
                        vf  103
          0.40   50.36             vg       uf        ug       hf     1417.18          hg        sf       sg    0.40
          0.50   46.53   1.4236                                       1406.73                                   0.50
          0.60   43.28   1.4330  2.6795  45.52     1264.54  45.46     1397.76       1371.72  0.1992    6.1618   0.60
          0.70   40.46   1.4410  2.1752  28.73     1269.31  28.66     1389.85       1378.07  0.1245    6.0829   0.70
          0.80   37.94   1.4482  1.8345  14.51     1273.27  14.42     1382.73       1383.34  0.0622    6.0186   0.80
          0.90   35.67   1.4546  1.5884            1276.66            1376.23       1387.84  0.0086    5.9643   0.90
                         1.4605  1.4020   2.11     1279.61   2.01                   1391.78            5.9174
                                 1.2559      8.93  1282.24      9.04                1395.27    0.0386  5.8760   1.00
                                           18.91              19.04                            0.0808           1.25
                                                                                                                1.50
         1.00 33.60     1.4660   1.1381  28.03     1284.61  28.18     1370.23       1398.41  0.1191    5.8391   1.75
         1.25 29.07     1.4782   0.9237  48.03     1289.65  48.22     1356.89       1405.11  0.2018    5.7610   2.00
         1.50 25.22     1.4889   0.7787  65.10     1293.80  65.32     1345.28       1410.61  0.2712    5.6973
         1.75 21.86     1.4984   0.6740  80.08     1297.33  80.35     1334.92       1415.27  0.3312    5.6435   2.25
         2.00 18.86     1.5071   0.5946  93.50     1300.39  93.80     1325.51       1419.31  0.3843    5.5969   2.50
                                                                                                                2.75
         2.25 16.15     1.5151   0.5323  105.68    1303.08  106.03    1316.83       1422.86  0.4319    5.5558   3.00
         2.50 13.67     1.5225   0.4821  116.88    1305.49  117.26    1308.76       1426.03  0.4753    5.5190   3.25
         2.75 11.37     1.5295   0.4408  127.26    1307.67  127.68    1301.20       1428.88  0.5152    5.4858
         3.00 9.24      1.5361   0.4061  136.96    1309.65  137.42    1294.05       1431.47  0.5520    5.4554   3.50
         3.25 7.24      1.5424   0.3765  146.06    1311.46  146.57    1287.27       1433.84  0.5864    5.4275   3.75
                                                                                                                4.00
Ammonia  3.50 5.36 1.5484 0.3511 154.66 1313.14 155.20 1280.81 1436.01                       0.6186    5.4016   4.25
                                                                                             0.6489    5.3774   4.50
         3.75 3.58 1.5542 0.3289 162.80 1314.68 163.38 1274.64 1438.03                       0.6776    5.3548
                                                                                             0.7048    5.3336   4.75
         4.00 1.90 1.5597 0.3094 170.55 1316.12 171.18 1268.71 1439.89                       0.7308    5.3135   5.00
                                                                                                                5.25
         4.25 0.29 1.5650 0.2921 177.96 1317.47 178.62 1263.01 1441.63                                          5.50
                                                                                                                5.75
         4.50    1.25 1.5702 0.2767 185.04 1318.73 185.75 1257.50 1443.25
                                                                                                                6.00
         4.75    2.72 1.5752 0.2629 191.84 1319.91 192.59 1252.18 1444.77                    0.7555    5.2946   7.00
                                                                                             0.7791    5.2765   8.00
         5.00    4.13 1.5800 0.2503 198.39 1321.02 199.18 1247.02 1446.19                    0.8018    5.2594   9.00
                                                                                             0.8236    5.2430  10.00
         5.25    5.48 1.5847 0.2390 204.69 1322.07 205.52 1242.01 1447.53                    0.8446    5.2273
                                                                                                               12.00
         5.50    6.79 1.5893 0.2286 210.78 1323.06 211.65 1237.15 1448.80                                      14.00
                                                                                                               16.00
         5.75    8.05 1.5938 0.2191 216.66 1324.00 217.58 1232.41 1449.99                                      18.00
                                                                                                               20.00
          6.00    9.27  1.5982   0.2104  222.37    1324.89  223.32    1227.79       1451.12  0.8649    5.2122
          7.00   13.79  1.6148   0.1815  243.56    1328.04  244.69    1210.38       1455.07  0.9394    5.1576
          8.00   17.84  1.6302   0.1596  262.64    1330.64  263.95    1194.36       1458.30  1.0054    5.1099
          9.00   21.52  1.6446   0.1424  280.05    1332.82  281.53    1179.44       1460.97  1.0649    5.0675
         10.00   24.89  1.6584   0.1285  296.10    1334.66  297.76    1165.42       1463.18  1.1191    5.0294

         12.00   30.94  1.6841   0.1075  324.99    1337.52  327.01    1139.52       1466.53  1.2152    4.9625
         14.00   36.26  1.7080   0.0923  350.58    1339.56  352.97    1115.82       1468.79  1.2987    4.9050
         16.00   41.03  1.7306   0.0808  373.69    1340.97  376.46    1093.77       1470.23  1.3729    4.8542
         18.00   45.38  1.7522   0.0717  394.85    1341.88  398.00    1073.01       1471.01  1.4399    4.8086
         20.00   49.37  1.7731   0.0644  414.44    1342.37  417.99    1053.27       1471.26  1.5012    4.7670
                                                                                         Tables in SI Units 743

TABLE A-15 Properties of Superheated Ammonia Vapor

T  v          u        h            s                 v      u      h            s
                                                    m3/kg  kJ/kg
C m3/kg kJ/kg kJ/kg kJ/kg # K                                       kJ/kg kJ/kg # K

              p  0.4 bar  0.04 MPa                         p  0.6 bar  0.06 MPa
                  (Tsat  50.36C)                               (Tsat  43.28C)

Sat. 2.6795   1264.54 1371.72       6.1618  1.8345 1273.27 1383.34 6.0186
50 2.6841     1265.11 1372.48       6.1652
45 2.7481     1273.05 1382.98       6.2118

40 2.8118     1281.01 1393.48       6.2573  1.8630         1278.62 1390.40       6.0490
35 2.8753     1288.96 1403.98       6.3018  1.9061         1286.75 1401.12       6.0946
30 2.9385     1296.93 1414.47       6.3455  1.9491         1294.88 1411.83       6.1390

25 3.0015     1304.90 1424.96       6.3882  1.9918         1303.01 1422.52       6.1826
20 3.0644     1312.88 1435.46       6.4300  2.0343         1311.13 1433.19       6.2251
15 3.1271     1320.87 1445.95       6.4711  2.0766         1319.25 1443.85       6.2668

10 3.1896     1328.87  1456.45      6.5114  2.1188         1327.37  1454.50      6.3077
 5 3.2520     1336.88  1466.95      6.5509  2.1609         1335.49  1465.14      6.3478
              1344.90  1477.47      6.5898  2.2028         1343.61  1475.78      6.3871
    0 3.3142  1352.95  1488.00      6.6280  2.2446         1351.75  1486.43      6.4257
    5 3.3764

              p  0.8 bar  0.08 MPa                     p  1.0 bar  0.10 MPa
                  (Tsat  37.94C)                           (Tsat  33.60C)

Sat. 1.4021   1279.61 1391.78       5.9174  1.1381 1284.61 1398.41 5.8391                                        Ammonia
35 1.4215     1284.51 1398.23       5.9446
30 1.4543     1292.81 1409.15       5.9900  1.1573         1290.71 1406.44       5.8723

25 1.4868     1301.09 1420.04       6.0343  1.1838         1299.15 1417.53       5.9175
20 1.5192     1309.36 1430.90       6.0777  1.2101         1307.57 1428.58       5.9616
15 1.5514     1317.61 1441.72       6.1200  1.2362         1315.96 1439.58       6.0046

10 1.5834     1325.85 1452.53       6.1615  1.2621         1324.33 1450.54       6.0467
 5 1.6153     1334.09 1463.31       6.2021  1.2880         1332.67 1461.47       6.0878
              1342.31 1474.08       6.2419  1.3136         1341.00 1472.37       6.1281
    0 1.6471
                                            1.3392                               6.1676
 5 1.6788     1350.54  1484.84      6.2809  1.3647         1349.33  1483.25      6.2063
10 1.7103     1358.77  1495.60      6.3192  1.3900         1357.64  1494.11      6.2442
15 1.7418     1367.01  1506.35      6.3568  1.4153         1365.95  1504.96      6.2816
20 1.7732     1375.25  1517.10      6.3939                 1374.27  1515.80

              p  1.5 bar  0.15 MPa                     p  2.0 bar  0.20 MPa
                  (Tsat  25.22C)                           (Tsat  18.86C)

Sat. 0.7787   1293.80 1410.61       5.6973  0.59460 1300.39 1419.31 5.5969
25 0.7795     1294.20 1411.13       5.6994
20 0.7978     1303.00 1422.67       5.7454

15 0.8158     1311.75 1434.12       5.7902  0.60542 1307.43 1428.51              5.6328
10 0.8336     1320.44 1445.49       5.8338  0.61926 1316.46 1440.31              5.6781
 5 0.8514     1329.08 1456.79       5.8764  0.63294 1325.41 1452.00              5.7221

 0 0.8689     1337.68 1468.02       5.9179  0.64648 1334.29 1463.59              5.7649
 5 0.8864     1346.25 1479.20       5.9585  0.65989 1343.11 1475.09              5.8066
10 0.9037     1354.78 1490.34       5.9981  0.67320 1351.87 1486.51              5.8473

15 0.9210     1363.29  1501.44      6.0370  0.68640        1360.59  1497.87      5.8871
20 0.9382     1371.79  1512.51      6.0751  0.69952        1369.28  1509.18      5.9260
25 0.9553     1380.28  1523.56      6.1125  0.71256        1377.93  1520.44      5.9641
30 0.9723     1388.76  1534.60      6.1492  0.72553        1386.56  1531.67      6.0014
         744 Tables in SI Units

                                 TABLE A-15 (Continued)

                                 T  v       u            h      s           v        u      h            s
                                          kJ/kg                           m3/kg    kJ/kg
                                 C m3/kg                 kJ/kg kJ/kg # K                    kJ/kg kJ/kg # K

                                          p  2.5 bar  0.25 MPa                     p  3.0 bar  0.30 MPa
                                              (Tsat  13.67C)                           (Tsat  9.24C)

                                 Sat. 0.48213 1305.49 1426.03   5.5190    0.40607 1309.65 1431.47 5.4554
                                 10 0.49051 1312.37 1435.00     5.5534
                                  5 0.50180 1321.65 1447.10     5.5989    0.41428  1317.80  1442.08      5.4953

                                  0 0.51293 1330.83 1459.06     5.6431    0.42382  1327.28  1454.43      5.5409
                                  5 0.52393 1339.91 1470.89     5.6860    0.43323  1336.64  1466.61      5.5851
                                 10 0.53482 1348.91 1482.61     5.7278    0.44251  1345.89  1478.65      5.6280

                                 15 0.54560 1357.84 1494.25     5.7685    0.45169  1355.05  1490.56      5.6697
                                 20 0.55630 1366.72 1505.80     5.8083    0.46078  1364.13  1502.36      5.7103
                                 25 0.56691 1375.55 1517.28     5.8471    0.46978  1373.14  1514.07      5.7499

                                 30 0.57745 1384.34 1528.70     5.8851    0.47870  1382.09  1525.70      5.7886
                                 35 0.58793 1393.10 1540.08     5.9223    0.48756  1391.00  1537.26      5.8264
                                 40 0.59835 1401.84 1551.42     5.9589    0.49637  1399.86  1548.77      5.8635
                                 45 0.60872 1410.56 1562.74     5.9947    0.50512  1408.70  1560.24      5.8998

                                          p  3.5 bar  0.35 MPa                     p  4.0 bar  0.40 MPa
                                              (Tsat  5.36C)                            (Tsat  1.90C)

Ammonia                          Sat. 0.35108 1313.14 1436.01   5.4016    0.30942 1316.12 1439.89        5.3548
                                    0 0.36011 1323.66 1449.70   5.4522    0.31227 1319.95 1444.86        5.3731
                                  10 0.37654 1342.82 1474.61    5.5417    0.32701 1339.68 1470.49        5.4652

                                 20 0.39251 1361.49 1498.87     5.6259    0.34129 1358.81 1495.33        5.5515
                                 30 0.40814 1379.81 1522.66     5.7057    0.35520 1377.49 1519.57        5.6328
                                 40 0.42350 1397.87 1546.09     5.7818    0.36884 1395.85 1543.38        5.7101

                                  60 0.45363 1433.55 1592.32    5.9249    0.39550 1431.97 1590.17        5.8549
                                  80 0.48320 1469.06 1638.18    6.0586    0.42160 1467.77 1636.41        5.9897
                                 100 0.51240 1504.73 1684.07    6.1850    0.44733 1503.64 1682.58        6.1169

                                 120 0.54136 1540.79 1730.26    6.3056    0.47280 1539.85 1728.97        6.2380
                                 140 0.57013 1577.38 1776.92    6.4213    0.49808 1576.55 1775.79        6.3541
                                 160 0.59876 1614.60 1824.16    6.5330    0.52323 1613.86 1823.16        6.4661

                                 180 0.62728 1652.51 1872.06 6.6411       0.54827 1651.85 1871.16 6.5744
                                 200 0.65572 1691.15 1920.65 6.7460       0.57322 1690.56 1919.85 6.6796

                                          p  4.5 bar  0.45 MPa                     p  5.0 bar  0.50 MPa
                                                (Tsat  1.25C)                            (Tsat  4.13C)

                                 Sat. 0.27671 1318.73 1443.25   5.3135    0.25034 1321.02 1446.19        5.2765
                                  10 0.28846 1336.48 1466.29    5.3962    0.25757 1333.22 1462.00        5.3330
                                  20 0.30142 1356.09 1491.72    5.4845    0.26949 1353.32 1488.06        5.4234

                                 30 0.31401 1375.15 1516.45     5.5674    0.28103 1372.76 1513.28        5.5080
                                 40 0.32631 1393.80 1540.64     5.6460    0.29227 1391.74 1537.87        5.5878
                                 60 0.35029 1430.37 1588.00     5.7926    0.31410 1428.76 1585.81        5.7362

                                  80 0.37369 1466.47 1634.63    5.9285    0.33535 1465.16 1632.84        5.8733
                                 100 0.39671 1502.55 1681.07    6.0564    0.35621 1501.46 1679.56        6.0020
                                 120 0.41947 1538.91 1727.67    6.1781    0.37681 1537.97 1726.37        6.1242

                                 140 0.44205 1575.73 1774.65    6.2946    0.39722  1574.90  1773.51      6.2412
                                 160 0.46448 1613.13 1822.15    6.4069    0.41749  1612.40  1821.14      6.3537
                                 180 0.48681 1651.20 1870.26    6.5155    0.43765  1650.54  1869.36      6.4626
                                 200 0.50905 1689.97 1919.04    6.6208    0.45771  1689.38  1918.24      6.5681
                                                                              Tables in SI Units 745

TABLE A-15 (Continued)

T  v  u                 h     s         v        u      h             s
                                      m3/kg    kJ/kg
C m3/kg kJ/kg kJ/kg kJ/kg # K                           kJ/kg kJ/kg # K

      p  5.5 bar  0.55 MPa                     p  6.0 bar  0.60 MPa
            (Tsat  6.79C)                            (Tsat  9.27C)

Sat. 0.22861 1323.06 1448.80  5.2430  0.21038 1324.89 1451.12         5.2122
 10 0.23227 1329.88 1457.63   5.2743  0.21115 1326.47 1453.16         5.2195
 20 0.24335 1350.50 1484.34   5.3671  0.22155 1347.62 1480.55         5.3145

30 0.25403 1370.35 1510.07    5.4534  0.23152 1367.90 1506.81         5.4026
40 0.26441 1389.64 1535.07    5.5345  0.24118 1387.52 1532.23         5.4851
50 0.27454 1408.53 1559.53    5.6114  0.25059 1406.67 1557.03         5.5631

 60 0.28449 1427.13 1583.60   5.6848  0.25981 1425.49 1581.38         5.6373
 80 0.30398 1463.85 1631.04   5.8230  0.27783 1462.52 1629.22         5.7768
100 0.32307 1500.36 1678.05   5.9525  0.29546 1499.25 1676.52         5.9071

120 0.34190 1537.02 1725.07   6.0753  0.31281 1536.07 1723.76         6.0304
140 0.36054 1574.07 1772.37   6.1926  0.32997 1573.24 1771.22         6.1481
160 0.37903 1611.66 1820.13   6.3055  0.34699 1610.92 1819.12         6.2613

180 0.39742 1649.88 1868.46 6.4146    0.36390 1649.22 1867.56 6.3707
200 0.41571 1688.79 1917.43 6.5203    0.38071 1688.20 1916.63 6.4766

      p  7.0 bar  0.70 MPa                     p  8.0 bar  0.80 MPa                                   Ammonia
           (Tsat  13.79C)                           (Tsat  17.84C)

Sat. 0.18148 1328.04 1455.07  5.1576  0.15958 1330.64 1458.30         5.1099
 20 0.18721 1341.72 1472.77   5.2186  0.16138 1335.59 1464.70         5.1318
 30 0.19610 1362.88 1500.15   5.3104  0.16948 1357.71 1493.29         5.2277

40 0.20464 1383.20 1526.45    5.3958  0.17720 1378.77 1520.53         5.3161
50 0.21293 1402.90 1551.95    5.4760  0.18465 1399.05 1546.77         5.3986
60 0.22101 1422.16 1576.87    5.5519  0.19189 1418.77 1572.28         5.4763

 80 0.23674 1459.85 1625.56   5.6939  0.20590 1457.14 1621.86         5.6209
100 0.25205 1497.02 1673.46   5.8258  0.21949 1494.77 1670.37         5.7545
120 0.26709 1534.16 1721.12   5.9502  0.23280 1532.24 1718.48         5.8801

140 0.28193 1571.57 1768.92   6.0688  0.24590  1569.89  1766.61       5.9995
160 0.29663 1609.44 1817.08   6.1826  0.25886  1607.96  1815.04       6.1140
180 0.31121 1647.90 1865.75   6.2925  0.27170  1646.57  1863.94       6.2243
200 0.32571 1687.02 1915.01   6.3988  0.28445  1685.83  1913.39       6.3311

      p  9.0 bar  0.90 MPa                     p  10.0 bar  1.00 MPa
           (Tsat  21.52C)                            (Tsat  24.89C)

Sat. 0.14239 1332.82 1460.97  5.0675  0.12852 1334.66 1463.18         5.0294
 30 0.14872 1352.36 1486.20   5.1520  0.13206 1346.82 1478.88         5.0816
 40 0.15582 1374.21 1514.45   5.2436  0.13868 1369.52 1508.20         5.1768

50 0.16263 1395.11 1541.47    5.3286  0.14499 1391.07 1536.06         5.2644
60 0.16922 1415.32 1567.61    5.4083  0.15106 1411.79 1562.86         5.3460
80 0.18191 1454.39 1618.11    5.5555  0.16270 1451.60 1614.31         5.4960

100 0.19416 1492.50 1667.24   5.6908  0.17389 1490.20 1664.10         5.6332
120 0.20612 1530.30 1715.81   5.8176  0.18478 1528.35 1713.13         5.7612
140 0.21788 1568.20 1764.29   5.9379  0.19545 1566.51 1761.96         5.8823

160 0.22948 1606.46 1813.00   6.0530  0.20598 1604.97 1810.94         5.9981
180 0.24097 1645.24 1862.12   6.1639  0.21638 1643.91 1860.29         6.1095
200 0.25237 1684.64 1911.77   6.2711  0.22670 1683.44 1910.14         6.2171
         746 Tables in SI Units

                                 TABLE A-15 (Continued)

                                 T  v       u            h       s          v        u      h             s
                                          kJ/kg                           m3/kg    kJ/kg
                                 C m3/kg                 kJ/kg kJ/kg # K                    kJ/kg kJ/kg # K

                                          p  12.0 bar  1.20 MPa                    p  14.0 bar  1.40 MPa
                                                (Tsat  30.94C)                           (Tsat  36.26C)

                                 Sat. 0.10751 1337.52 1466.53    4.9625   0.09231 1339.56 1468.79         4.9050
                                  40 0.11287 1359.73 1495.18     5.0553   0.09432 1349.29 1481.33         4.9453
                                  60 0.12378 1404.54 1553.07     5.2347   0.10423 1396.97 1542.89         5.1360

                                  80 0.13387 1445.91 1606.56     5.3906   0.11324 1440.06 1598.59         5.2984
                                 100 0.14347 1485.55 1657.71     5.5315   0.12172 1480.79 1651.20         5.4433
                                 120 0.15275 1524.41 1707.71     5.6620   0.12986 1520.41 1702.21         5.5765

                                 140 0.16181 1563.09 1757.26     5.7850   0.13777 1559.63 1752.52         5.7013
                                 160 0.17072 1601.95 1806.81     5.9021   0.14552 1598.92 1802.65         5.8198
                                 180 0.17950 1641.23 1856.63     6.0145   0.15315 1638.53 1852.94         5.9333

                                 200 0.18819 1681.05 1906.87     6.1230   0.16068 1678.64 1903.59         6.0427
                                 220 0.19680 1721.50 1957.66     6.2282   0.16813 1719.35 1954.73         6.1485
                                 240 0.20534 1762.63 2009.04     6.3303   0.17551 1760.72 2006.43         6.2513

                                 260 0.21382 1804.48 2061.06 6.4297       0.18283 1802.78 2058.75 6.3513
                                 280 0.22225 1847.04 2113.74 6.5267       0.19010 1845.55 2111.69 6.4488

                                          p  16.0 bar  1.60 MPa                    p  18.0 bar  1.80 MPa
                                                (Tsat  41.03C)                           (Tsat  45.38C)

Ammonia                          Sat. 0.08079 1340.97 1470.23    4.8542   0.07174 1341.88 1471.01         4.8086
                                  60 0.08951 1389.06 1532.28     5.0461   0.07801 1380.77 1521.19         4.9627
                                  80 0.09774 1434.02 1590.40     5.2156   0.08565 1427.79 1581.97         5.1399

                                 100 0.10539 1475.93 1644.56     5.3648   0.09267 1470.97 1637.78         5.2937
                                 120 0.11268 1516.34 1696.64     5.5008   0.09931 1512.22 1690.98         5.4326
                                 140 0.11974 1556.14 1747.72     5.6276   0.10570 1552.61 1742.88         5.5614

                                 160 0.12663 1595.85 1798.45     5.7475   0.11192 1592.76 1794.23         5.6828
                                 180 0.13339 1635.81 1849.23     5.8621   0.11801 1633.08 1845.50         5.7985
                                 200 0.14005 1676.21 1900.29     5.9723   0.12400 1673.78 1896.98         5.9096

                                 220 0.14663 1717.18 1951.79     6.0789   0.12991  1715.00  1948.83       6.0170
                                 240 0.15314 1758.79 2003.81     6.1823   0.13574  1756.85  2001.18       6.1210
                                 260 0.15959 1801.07 2056.42     6.2829   0.14152  1799.35  2054.08       6.2222
                                 280 0.16599 1844.05 2109.64     6.3809   0.14724  1842.55  2107.58       6.3207

                                          p  20.0 bar  2.00 MPa
                                                (Tsat  49.37C)

                                 Sat. 0.06445 1342.37 1471.26    4.7670
                                  60 0.06875 1372.05 1509.54     4.8838
                                  80 0.07596 1421.36 1573.27     5.0696

                                 100 0.08248 1465.89 1630.86     5.2283
                                 120 0.08861 1508.03 1685.24     5.3703
                                 140 0.09447 1549.03 1737.98     5.5012

                                 160 0.10016 1589.65 1789.97     5.6241
                                 180 0.10571 1630.32 1841.74     5.7409
                                 200 0.11116 1671.33 1893.64     5.8530

                                 220 0.11652 1712.82 1945.87     5.9611
                                 240 0.12182 1754.90 1998.54     6.0658
                                 260 0.12706 1797.63 2051.74     6.1675
                                 280 0.13224 1841.03 2105.50     6.2665
                                                                                     Tables in SI Units 747

TABLE A-16 Properties of Saturated Propane (Liquid­Vapor): Temperature Table

                Specific Volume    Internal Energy          Enthalpy                 Entropy
                      m3/kg              kJ/kg                kJ/kg                  kJ/kg # K

Temp.  Press.     Sat.       Sat.    Sat.   Sat.      Sat.  Evap.              Sat.    Sat.   Sat.  Temp.
   C     bar     Liquid    Vapor   Liquid  Vapor    Liquid   hfg              Vapor  Liquid  Vapor     C
                vf  103
100    0.02888                vg      uf     ug        hf   480.4               hg      sf     sg   100
 90    0.06426   1.553                                      471.4                                    90
 80    0.1301    1.578   11.27     128.4   319.5    128.4   462.4             352.0  0.634   2.140   80
 70    0.2434    1.605    5.345    107.8   329.3    107.8   453.1             363.6  0.519   2.055   70
 60    0.4261    1.633    2.774            339.3            443.5             375.4  0.408   1.986   60
                 1.663    1.551     87.0   349.5     87.0                     387.3  0.301   1.929
                          0.9234    65.8   359.9     65.8                     399.2  0.198   1.883
                                    44.4             44.3

50     0.7046   1.694    0.5793    22.5 370.4 22.4 433.6 411.2 0.098 1.845 50
                1.728    0.3798
40     1.110    1.763    0.2585    0.2 381.0        0.0 423.2 423.2 0.000 1.815 40
                1.802    0.1815
30     1.677    1.844    0.1309    22.6 391.6       22.9 412.1 435.0 0.096 1.791 30

20     2.444                       45.9 402.4       46.3 400.5 446.8 0.190 1.772 20

10     3.451                       69.8 413.2       70.4 388.0 458.4 0.282 1.757 10

0      4.743    1.890    0.09653   94.2 423.8       95.1 374.5 469.6 0.374 1.745                                                            0

4      5.349    1.910    0.08591   104.2 428.1 105.3 368.8 474.1 0.410 1.741                                                                4

8      6.011    1.931    0.07666   114.3 432.3 115.5 362.9 478.4 0.446 1.737                                                                8

12     6.732    1.952    0.06858   124.6 436.5 125.9 356.8 482.7 0.482 1.734                                                                12

16     7.515    1.975    0.06149   135.0 440.7 136.4 350.5 486.9 0.519 1.731                                                                16

20     8.362    1.999    0.05525   145.4 444.8 147.1 343.9 491.0 0.555 1.728                                                                20

24     9.278    2.024    0.04973   156.1 448.9 158.0 337.0 495.0 0.591 1.725                                                                24

28 10.27        2.050    0.04483   166.9 452.9 169.0 329.9 498.9 0.627 1.722                                                                28

32 11.33        2.078    0.04048   177.8 456.7 180.2 322.4 502.6 0.663 1.720                                                                32

36 12.47        2.108    0.03659   188.9 460.6 191.6 314.6 506.2 0.699 1.717                                                                36

40 13.69        2.140    0.03310   200.2 464.3 203.1 306.5 509.6 0.736 1.715                                                                40
44 15.00
48 16.40        2.174    0.02997   211.7 467.9 214.9 298.0 512.9 0.772 1.712                                                                44
52 17.89
56 19.47        2.211    0.02714   223.4 471.4 227.0 288.9 515.9 0.809 1.709                                                                48    Propane

                2.250    0.02459   235.3 474.6 239.3 279.3 518.6 0.846 1.705                                                                52

                2.293    0.02227   247.4 477.7 251.9 269.2 521.1 0.884 1.701                                                                56

60 21.16        2.340    0.02015   259.8 480.6 264.8 258.4 523.2 0.921 1.697                                                                60
65 23.42
70 25.86        2.406    0.01776   275.7 483.6 281.4 243.8 525.2 0.969 1.690                                                                65
75 28.49
80 31.31        2.483    0.01560   292.3 486.1 298.7 227.7 526.4 1.018 1.682                                                                70

                2.573    0.01363   309.5 487.8 316.8 209.8 526.6 1.069 1.671                                                                75

                2.683    0.01182   327.6 488.2 336.0 189.2 525.2 1.122 1.657                                                                80

85 34.36        2.827    0.01011   347.2 486.9 356.9 164.7 521.6 1.178 1.638                                                                85
90 37.64
95 41.19        3.038    0.008415 369.4 482.2 380.8 133.1 513.9 1.242 1.608                                                                 90
96.7 42.48
                3.488    0.006395 399.8 467.4 414.2 79.5 493.7 1.330 1.546                                                                  95

                4.535    0.004535 434.9 434.9 454.2 0.0 457.2 1.437 1.437                                                                   96.7

Source: Tables A-16 through A-18 are calculated based on B. A. Younglove and J. F. Ely, "Thermophysical Properties of Fluids. II. Methane,
Ethane, Propane, Isobutane and Normal Butane," J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data, Vol. 16, No. 4, 1987, pp. 577­598.
         748 Tables in SI Units

         TABLE A-17 Properties of Saturated Propane (Liquid­Vapor): Pressure Table

                                 Specific Volume  Internal Energy                   Enthalpy         Entropy
                                       m3/kg            kJ/kg                         kJ/kg          kJ/kg # K

         Press.  Temp.     Sat.     Sat.            Sat.   Sat.      Sat.           Evap.      Sat.    Sat.    Sat.  Press.
          bar       C    Liquid    Vapor          Liquid  Vapor    Liquid            hfg      Vapor  Liquid   Vapor   bar
                        vf  103
          0.05   93.28               vg              uf     ug        hf            474.4       hg      sf      sg    0.05
          0.10   83.87   1.570                                                      465.9                             0.10
          0.25   69.55   1.594   6.752            114.6   326.0    114.6            452.7     359.8  0.556    2.081   0.25
          0.50   56.93   1.634   3.542             95.1   335.4     95.1            440.5     370.8  0.450    2.011   0.50
          0.75   48.68   1.672   1.513             64.9   350.0     64.9            432.3     387.8  0.297    1.927   0.75
                         1.698   0.7962            37.7   363.1     37.6                      402.9  0.167    1.871
                                 0.5467            19.6   371.8     19.5                      412.8  0.085    1.841   1.00
                                                                                                                      2.00
         1.00 42.38     1.719    0.4185           5.6     378.5    5.4              425.7     420.3  0.023    1.822   3.00
                        1.781    0.2192            33.1   396.6     33.5            406.9     440.4    0.139  1.782   4.00
         2.00 25.43     1.826    0.1496            59.8   408.7     60.3            393.3     453.6    0.244  1.762   5.00
                        1.865    0.1137            80.8   418.0     81.5            382.0     463.5    0.324  1.751
         3.00 14.16     1.899    0.09172           98.6   425.7     99.5            372.1     471.6    0.389  1.743   6.00
                                                                                                                      7.00
         4.00 5.46                                                                            478.3                   8.00
                                                                                              484.2                   9.00
         5.00    1.74                                                                         489.3                  10.00
                                                                                              493.8
          6.00    7.93  1.931    0.07680          114.2   432.2    115.3            363.0     497.9  0.446    1.737  11.00
          7.00   13.41  1.960    0.06598          128.2   438.0    129.6            354.6            0.495    1.733  12.00
          8.00   18.33  1.989    0.05776          141.0   443.1    142.6            346.7     501.5  0.540    1.729  13.00
          9.00   22.82  2.016    0.05129          152.9   447.6    154.7            339.1     504.8  0.580    1.726  14.00
         10.00   26.95  2.043    0.04606          164.0   451.8    166.1            331.8     507.7  0.618    1.723  15.00
                                                                                              510.4
         11.00   30.80  2.070    0.04174          174.5   455.6    176.8            324.7     512.9  0.652    1.721  16.00
         12.00   34.39  2.096    0.03810          184.4   459.1    187.0            317.8            0.685    1.718  17.00
         13.00   37.77  2.122    0.03499          193.9   462.2    196.7            311.0     515.0  0.716    1.716  18.00
         14.00   40.97  2.148    0.03231          203.0   465.2    206.0            304.4     517.0  0.745    1.714  19.00
         15.00   44.01  2.174    0.02997          211.7   467.9    215.0            297.9     518.8  0.772    1.712  20.00
                                                                                              520.4
Propane  16.00   46.89  2.200    0.02790          220.1   470.4    223.6            291.4     521.8  0.799    1.710  22.00
         17.00   49.65  2.227    0.02606          228.3   472.7    232.0            285.0            0.824    1.707  24.00
         18.00   52.30  2.253    0.02441          236.2   474.9    240.2            278.6     524.0  0.849    1.705  26.00
         19.00   54.83  2.280    0.02292          243.8   476.9    248.2            272.2     525.6  0.873    1.703  28.00
         20.00   57.27  2.308    0.02157          251.3   478.7    255.9            265.9     526.5  0.896    1.700  30.00
                                                                                              526.6
         22.00   61.90  2.364    0.01921          265.8   481.7    271.0            253.0     526.0  0.939    1.695  35.00
         24.00   66.21  2.424    0.01721          279.7   484.3    285.5            240.1            0.981    1.688  40.00
         26.00   70.27  2.487    0.01549          293.1   486.2    299.6            226.9     520.5  1.021    1.681  42.48
         28.00   74.10  2.555    0.01398          306.2   487.5    313.4            213.2     503.3  1.060    1.673
         30.00   77.72  2.630    0.01263          319.2   488.1    327.1            198.9     454.2  1.097    1.664

         35.00   86.01  2.862    0.009771         351.4   486.3    361.4            159.1            1.190    1.633
         40.00   93.38  3.279    0.007151         387.9   474.7    401.0            102.3            1.295    1.574
         42.48   96.70  4.535    0.004535         434.9   434.9    454.2                             1.437    1.437
                                                                                       0.0
                                                                              Tables in SI Units 749

TABLE A-18 Properties of Superheated Propane

T  v         u      h              s          v       u      h             s

C m3/kg kJ/kg kJ/kg kJ/kg # K                 m3/kg kJ/kg kJ/kg kJ/kg # K

      p  0.05 bar  0.005 MPa                         p  0.1 bar  0.01 MPa
           (Tsat  93.28C)                                (Tsat  83.87C)

Sat. 6.752   326.0 359.8          2.081       3.542 367.3 370.8 2.011
90 6.877     329.4 363.8          2.103
80 7.258     339.8 376.1          2.169       3.617   339.5  375.7  2.037

70 7.639     350.6 388.8          2.233       3.808   350.3  388.4  2.101
60 8.018     361.8 401.9          2.296       3.999   361.5  401.5  2.164
50 8.397     373.3 415.3          2.357       4.190   373.1  415.0  2.226

40 8.776     385.1 429.0          2.418       4.380   385.0  428.8  2.286
30 9.155     397.4 443.2          2.477       4.570   397.3  443.0  2.346
20 9.533     410.1 457.8          2.536       4.760   410.0  457.6  2.405

10 9.911     423.2  472.8         2.594       4.950   423.1  472.6  2.463
    0 10.29  436.8  488.2         2.652       5.139   436.7  488.1  2.520
  10 10.67   450.8  504.1         2.709       5.329   450.6  503.9  2.578
  20 11.05   270.6  520.4         2.765       5.518   465.1  520.3  2.634

             p  0.5 bar  0.05 MPa                     p  1.0 bar  0.1 MPa
                 (Tsat  56.93C)                           (Tsat  42.38C)

Sat. 0.796   363.1 402.9          1.871       0.4185 378.5 420.3 1.822
50 0.824     371.3 412.5          1.914
40 0.863     383.4 426.6          1.976       0.4234  381.5  423.8  1.837

30 0.903     396.0 441.1          2.037       0.4439  394.2  438.6  1.899
20 0.942     408.8 455.9          2.096       0.4641  407.3  453.7  1.960
10 0.981     422.1 471.1          2.155       0.4842  420.7  469.1  2.019

 0 1.019     435.8 486.7          2.213       0.5040  434.4  484.8  2.078                             Propane
10 1.058     449.8 502.7          2.271       0.5238  448.6  501.0  2.136
20 1.096     464.3 519.1          2.328       0.5434  463.3  517.6  2.194

30 1.135     479.2  535.9         2.384       0.5629  478.2  534.5  2.251
40 1.173     494.6  553.2         2.440       0.5824  493.7  551.9  2.307
50 1.211     510.4  570.9         2.496       0.6018  509.5  569.7  2.363
60 1.249     526.7  589.1         2.551       0.6211  525.8  587.9  2.419

             p  2.0 bar  0.2 MPa                      p  3.0 bar  0.3 MPa
                (Tsat  25.43C)                            (Tsat  14.16C)

Sat. 0.2192 396.6 440.4           1.782       0.1496 408.7 453.6 1.762
20 0.2251 404.0 449.0             1.816
10 0.2358 417.7 464.9             1.877       0.1527  414.7  460.5  1.789

 0 0.2463 431.8 481.1             1.938       0.1602  429.0  477.1  1.851
10 0.2566 446.3 497.6             1.997       0.1674  443.8  494.0  1.912
20 0.2669 461.1 514.5             2.056       0.1746  458.8  511.2  1.971

30 0.2770 476.3 531.7             2.113       0.1816  474.2  528.7  2.030
40 0.2871 491.9 549.3             2.170       0.1885  490.1  546.6  2.088
50 0.2970 507.9 567.3             2.227       0.1954  506.2  564.8  2.145

60 0.3070 524.3 585.7             2.283       0.2022  522.7  583.4  2.202
70 0.3169 541.1 604.5             2.339       0.2090  539.6  602.3  2.258
80 0.3267 558.4 623.7             2.394       0.2157  557.0  621.7  2.314
90 0.3365 576.1 643.4             2.449       0.2223  574.8  641.5  2.369
         750 Tables in SI Units

                                 TABLE A-18 (Continued)

                                 T  v  u                 h  s      v        u      h       s

                                 C m3/kg kJ/kg kJ/kg kJ/kg # K     m3/kg kJ/kg kJ/kg kJ/kg # K

                                       p  4.0 bar  0.4 MPa            p  5.0 bar  0.5 MPa
                                           (Tsat  5.46C)                   (Tsat  1.74C)

                                 Sat. 0.1137 418.0 463.5    1.751  0.09172 425.7 471.6 1.743
                                    0 0.1169 426.1 472.9    1.786
                                  10 0.1227 441.2 490.3     1.848  0.09577  438.4  486.3  1.796

                                 20 0.1283 456.6 507.9      1.909  0.1005   454.1  504.3  1.858
                                 30 0.1338 472.2 525.7      1.969  0.1051   470.0  522.5  1.919
                                 40 0.1392 488.1 543.8      2.027  0.1096   486.1  540.9  1.979

                                 50 0.1445 504.4 562.2      2.085  0.1140   502.5  559.5  2.038
                                 60 0.1498 521.1 581.0      2.143  0.1183   519.4  578.5  2.095
                                 70 0.1550 538.1 600.1      2.199  0.1226   536.6  597.9  2.153

                                  80 0.1601 555.7 619.7     2.255  0.1268   554.1  617.5  2.209
                                  90 0.1652 573.5 639.6     2.311  0.1310   572.1  637.6  2.265
                                 100 0.1703 591.8 659.9     2.366  0.1351   590.5  658.0  2.321
                                 110 0.1754 610.4 680.6     2.421  0.1392   609.3  678.9  2.376

                                       p  6.0 bar  0.6 MPa                 p  7.0 bar  0.7 MPa
                                            (Tsat  7.93C)                       (Tsat  13.41C)

                                 Sat. 0.07680 432.2 478.3   1.737  0.06598 438.0 484.2 1.733
                                  10 0.07769 435.6 482.2    1.751
                                  20 0.08187 451.5 500.6    1.815  0.06847  448.8  496.7  1.776

                                 30 0.08588 467.7 519.2     1.877  0.07210  465.2  515.7  1.840
                                 40 0.08978 484.0 537.9     1.938  0.07558  481.9  534.8  1.901
                                 50 0.09357 500.7 556.8     1.997  0.07896  498.7  554.0  1.962

Propane                          60 0.09729 517.6 576.0     2.056  0.08225  515.9  573.5  2.021
                                 70 0.1009 535.0 595.5      2.113  0.08547  533.4  593.2  2.079
                                 80 0.1045 552.7 615.4      2.170  0.08863  551.2  613.2  2.137

                                  90 0.1081 570.7 635.6     2.227  0.09175  569.4  633.6  2.194
                                 100 0.1116 589.2 656.2     2.283  0.09482  587.9  654.3  2.250
                                 110 0.1151 608.0 677.1     2.338  0.09786  606.8  675.3  2.306
                                 120 0.1185 627.3 698.4     2.393  0.1009   626.2  696.8  2.361

                                       p  8.0 bar  0.8 MPa                 p  9.0 bar  0.9 MPa
                                           (Tsat  18.33C)                       (Tsat  22.82C)

                                 Sat. 0.05776 443.1 489.3   1.729  0.05129 447.2 493.8 1.726
                                  20 0.05834 445.9 492.6    1.740
                                  30 0.06170 462.7 512.1    1.806  0.05355  460.0  508.2  1.774

                                 40 0.06489 479.6 531.5     1.869  0.05653  477.2  528.1  1.839
                                 50 0.06796 496.7 551.1     1.930  0.05938  494.7  548.1  1.901
                                 60 0.07094 514.0 570.8     1.990  0.06213  512.2  568.1  1.962

                                 70 0.07385 531.6 590.7     2.049  0.06479  530.0  588.3  2.022
                                 80 0.07669 549.6 611.0     2.107  0.06738  548.1  608.7  2.081
                                 90 0.07948 567.9 631.5     2.165  0.06992  566.5  629.4  2.138

                                 100 0.08222 586.5 652.3    2.221  0.07241  585.2  650.4  2.195
                                 110 0.08493 605.6 673.5    2.277  0.07487  604.3  671.7  2.252
                                 120 0.08761 625.0 695.1    2.333  0.07729  623.7  693.3  2.307

                                 130 0.09026 644.8 717.0    2.388  0.07969  643.6  715.3  2.363
                                 140 0.09289 665.0 739.3    2.442  0.08206  663.8  737.7  2.418
                                                                Tables in SI Units 751

TABLE A-18 (Continued)

T  v  u                 h   s     v        u      h        s

C m3/kg kJ/kg kJ/kg kJ/kg # K     m3/kg kJ/kg kJ/kg kJ/kg # K

      p  10.0 bar  1.0 MPa           p  12.0 bar  1.2 MPa
           (Tsat  26.95C)                 (Tsat  34.39C)

Sat. 0.04606 451.8 497.9   1.723  0.03810 459.1 504.8 1.718
 30 0.04696 457.1 504.1    1.744
 40 0.04980 474.8 524.6    1.810  0.03957  469.4  516.9  1.757

50 0.05248 492.4 544.9     1.874  0.04204  487.8  538.2  1.824
60 0.05505 510.2 565.2     1.936  0.04436  506.1  559.3  1.889
70 0.05752 528.2 585.7     1.997  0.04657  524.4  580.3  1.951

 80 0.05992 546.4 606.3    2.056  0.04869  543.1  601.5  2.012
 90 0.06226 564.9 627.2    2.114  0.05075  561.8  622.7  2.071
100 0.06456 583.7 648.3    2.172  0.05275  580.9  644.2  2.129

110 0.06681 603.0 669.8    2.228  0.05470  600.4  666.0  2.187
120 0.06903 622.6 691.6    2.284  0.05662  620.1  688.0  2.244
130 0.07122 642.5 713.7    2.340  0.05851  640.1  710.3  2.300
140 0.07338 662.8 736.2    2.395  0.06037  660.6  733.0  2.355

      p  14.0 bar  1.4 MPa           p  16.0 bar  1.6 MPa
           (Tsat  40.97C)                 (Tsat  46.89C)

Sat. 0.03231 465.2 510.4   1.714  0.02790 470.4 515.0    1.710
 50 0.03446 482.6 530.8    1.778  0.02861 476.7 522.5    1.733
 60 0.03664 501.6 552.9    1.845  0.03075 496.6 545.8    1.804

70 0.03869 520.4 574.6     1.909  0.03270 516.2 568.5    1.871
80 0.04063 539.4 596.3     1.972  0.03453 535.7 590.9    1.935
90 0.04249 558.6 618.1     2.033  0.03626 555.2 613.2    1.997

100 0.04429 577.9 639.9    2.092  0.03792 574.8 635.5    2.058                          Propane
110 0.04604 597.5 662.0    2.150  0.03952 594.7 657.9    2.117
120 0.04774 617.5 684.3    2.208  0.04107 614.8 680.5    2.176

130 0.04942 637.7 706.9    2.265  0.04259  635.3  703.4  2.233
140 0.05106 658.3 729.8    2.321  0.04407  656.0  726.5  2.290
150 0.05268 679.2 753.0    2.376  0.04553  677.1  749.9  2.346
160 0.05428 700.5 776.5    2.431  0.04696  698.5  773.6  2.401

      p  18.0 bar  1.8 MPa           p  20.0 bar  2.0 MPa
           (Tsat  52.30C)                 (Tsat  57.27C)

Sat. 0.02441 474.9 518.8   1.705  0.02157 478.7 521.8    1.700
 60 0.02606 491.1 538.0    1.763  0.02216 484.8 529.1    1.722
 70 0.02798 511.4 561.8    1.834  0.02412 506.3 554.5    1.797

 80 0.02974 531.6 585.1    1.901  0.02585 527.1 578.8    1.867
 90 0.03138 551.5 608.0    1.965  0.02744 547.6 602.5    1.933
100 0.03293 571.5 630.8    2.027  0.02892 568.1 625.9    1.997

110 0.03443 591.7 653.7    2.087  0.03033 588.5 649.2    2.059
120 0.03586 612.1 676.6    2.146  0.03169 609.2 672.6    2.119
130 0.03726 632.7 699.8    2.204  0.03299 630.0 696.0    2.178

140 0.03863 653.6 723.1    2.262  0.03426 651.2 719.7    2.236
150 0.03996 674.8 746.7    2.318  0.03550 672.5 743.5    2.293
160 0.04127 696.3 770.6    2.374  0.03671 694.2 767.6    2.349

170 0.04256 718.2 794.8    2.429  0.03790 716.2 792.0    2.404
180 0.04383 740.4 819.3    2.484  0.03907 738.5 816.6    2.459
         752 Tables in SI Units

                                 TABLE A-18 (Continued)

                                 T  v  u                 h   s     v        u      h        s

                                 C m3/kg kJ/kg kJ/kg kJ/kg # K     m3/kg kJ/kg kJ/kg kJ/kg # K

                                       p  22.0 bar  2.2 MPa           p  24.0 bar  2.4 MPa
                                            (Tsat  61.90C)                 (Tsat  66.21C)

                                 Sat. 0.01921 481.8 524.0   1.695  0.01721 484.3 525.6    1.688
                                  70 0.02086 500.5 546.4    1.761  0.01802 493.7 536.9    1.722
                                  80 0.02261 522.4 572.1    1.834  0.01984 517.0 564.6    1.801

                                  90 0.02417 543.5 596.7    1.903  0.02141 539.0 590.4    1.873
                                 100 0.02561 564.5 620.8    1.969  0.02283 560.6 615.4    1.941
                                 110 0.02697 585.3 644.6    2.032  0.02414 581.9 639.8    2.006

                                 120 0.02826 606.2 668.4    2.093  0.02538 603.2 664.1    2.068
                                 130 0.02949 627.3 692.2    2.153  0.02656 624.6 688.3    2.129
                                 140 0.03069 648.6 716.1    2.211  0.02770 646.0 712.5    2.188

                                 150 0.03185 670.1 740.2    2.269  0.02880  667.8  736.9  2.247
                                 160 0.03298 691.9 764.5    2.326  0.02986  689.7  761.4  2.304
                                 170 0.03409 714.1 789.1    2.382  0.03091  711.9  786.1  2.360
                                 180 0.03517 736.5 813.9    2.437  0.03193  734.5  811.1  2.416

                                       p  26.0 bar  2.6 MPa           p  30.0 bar  3.0 MPa
                                            (Tsat  70.27C)                 (Tsat  77.72C)

                                 Sat. 0.01549 486.2 526.5   1.681  0.01263 488.2 526.0    1.664
                                  80 0.01742 511.0 556.3    1.767  0.01318 495.4 534.9    1.689
                                  90 0.01903 534.2 583.7    1.844  0.01506 522.8 568.0    1.782

                                 100 0.02045 556.4 609.6    1.914  0.01654 547.2 596.8    1.860
                                 110 0.02174 578.3 634.8    1.981  0.01783 570.4 623.9    1.932
                                 120 0.02294 600.0 659.6    2.045  0.01899 593.0 650.0    1.999

Propane                          130 0.02408 621.6 684.2    2.106  0.02007 615.4 675.6    2.063
                                 140 0.02516 643.4 708.8    2.167  0.02109 637.7 701.0    2.126
                                 150 0.02621 665.3 733.4    2.226  0.02206 660.1 726.3    2.186

                                 160 0.02723 687.4 758.2    2.283  0.02300  682.6  751.6  2.245
                                 170 0.02821 709.9 783.2    2.340  0.02390  705.4  777.1  2.303
                                 180 0.02918 732.5 808.4    2.397  0.02478  728.3  802.6  2.360
                                 190 0.03012 755.5 833.8    2.452  0.02563  751.5  828.4  2.417

                                       p  35.0 bar  3.5 MPa                p  40.0 bar  4.0 MPa
                                            (Tsat  86.01C)                      (Tsat  93.38C)

                                 Sat. 0.00977 486.3 520.5   1.633  0.00715 474.7 503.3 1.574
                                  90 0.01086 502.4 540.5    1.688
                                 100 0.01270 532.9 577.3    1.788  0.00940  512.1  549.7  1.700

                                 110 0.01408 558.9 608.2    1.870  0.01110  544.7  589.1  1.804
                                 120 0.01526 583.4 636.8    1.944  0.01237  572.1  621.6  1.887
                                 130 0.01631 607.0 664.1    2.012  0.01344  597.4  651.2  1.962

                                 140 0.01728 630.2 690.7    2.077  0.01439  621.9  679.5  2.031
                                 150 0.01819 653.3 717.0    2.140  0.01527  645.9  707.0  2.097
                                 160 0.01906 676.4 743.1    2.201  0.01609  669.7  734.1  2.160

                                 170 0.01989 699.6 769.2    2.261  0.01687  693.4  760.9  2.222
                                 180 0.02068 722.9 795.3    2.319  0.01761  717.3  787.7  2.281
                                 190 0.02146 746.5 821.6    2.376  0.01833  741.2  814.5  2.340
                                 200 0.02221 770.3 848.0    2.433  0.01902  765.3  841.4  2.397
                                                                                                              Tables in SI Units 753

TABLE A-19 Properties of Selected Solids and Liquids: cp, , and 

Substance                          Specific    Density,               Thermal
                                                                  Conductivity, 
                                   Heat, cp        
                                  (kJ/kg # K)  (kg/m3)               (W/m # K)

Selected Solids, 300K             0.903        2700                                                   237

Aluminium                         1.260        1350                                                   0.26
Coal, anthracite
Copper                            0.385        8930                                                   401
Granite
Iron                              0.775        2630                                                   2.79
Lead
Sand                              0.447        7870                                                   80.2
Silver
Soil                              0.129        11300                                                  35.3
Steel (AISI 302)
Tin                               0.800        1520                                                   0.27

                                  0.235        10500                                                  429

                                  1.840        2050                                                   0.52

                                  0.480        8060                                                   15.1

                                  0.227        7310                                                   66.6

Building Materials, 300K          0.835        1920                                                    0.72
                                  0.880        2300                                                      1.4
Brick, common                     0.750        2500                                                      1.4
Concrete (stone mix)              1.170         640
Glass, plate                      0.810        2320                                                   0.094
Hardboard, siding                 1.220         545                                                    2.15
Limestone                         1.380         510                                                    0.12
Plywood                                                                                                0.12
Softwoods (fir, pine)

Insulating Materials, 300K

Blanket (glass fiber)             --           16                                                     0.046
                                                                                                      0.039
Cork                              1.800        120                                                    0.038
                                                                                                      0.027
Duct liner (glass fiber, coated)  0.835        32                                                     0.068

Polystyrene (extruded)            1.210        55

Vermiculite fill (flakes)         0.835        80

Saturated Liquids                 4.818         599.8                                                 0.465                           Table A-19
                                  0.139        13529                                                  8.540
Ammonia, 300K                     1.267        1183.1                                                 0.085
Mercury, 300K                     1.434        1199.7                                                 0.081
Refrigerant 22, 300K              1.909         884.1                                                 0.145
Refrigerant 134a, 300K            4.211         999.9                                                 0.574
Unused Engine Oil, 300K           4.179         996.5                                                 0.613
Water, 275K                       4.182         987.1                                                 0.645
                                  4.195         973.5                                                 0.668
        300K                      4.220         956.8                                                 0.681
        325K                      4.256         937.4                                                 0.688
        350K
        375K
        400K

Source: Drawn from several sources, these data are only representative. Values can vary depending on
temperature, purity, moisture content, and other factors.
            754 Tables in SI Units

                                    TABLE A-20 Ideal Gas Specific Heats of Some Common Gases (kJ/kg # K)

                                           cp     cv         k  cp     cv            k      cp            cv    k

                                    Temp.          Air                 Nitrogen, N2                 Oxygen, O2         Temp.
                                      K                                                                                  K
                                           1.003  0.716  1.401  1.039  0.742         1.400  0.913   0.653       1.398
                                      250  1.005  0.718  1.400  1.039  0.743         1.400  0.918   0.658       1.395    250
                                      300  1.008  0.721  1.398  1.041  0.744         1.399  0.928   0.668       1.389    300
                                      350                                                                                350

                                    400 1.013 0.726 1.395 1.044 0.747 1.397 0.941 0.681 1.382 400
                                    450 1.020 0.733 1.391 1.049 0.752 1.395 0.956 0.696 1.373 450
                                    500 1.029 0.742 1.387 1.056 0.759 1.391 0.972 0.712 1.365 500

                                    550 1.040 0.753 1.381 1.065 0.768 1.387 0.988 0.728 1.358 550
                                    600 1.051 0.764 1.376 1.075 0.778 1.382 1.003 0.743 1.350 600
                                    650 1.063 0.776 1.370 1.086 0.789 1.376 1.017 0.758 1.343 650

                                    700 1.075 0.788 1.364 1.098 0.801 1.371 1.031 0.771 1.337 700
                                    750 1.087 0.800 1.359 1.110 0.813 1.365 1.043 0.783 1.332 750
                                    800 1.099 0.812 1.354 1.121 0.825 1.360 1.054 0.794 1.327 800

                                      900  1.121 0.834 1.344    1.145 0.849 1.349           1.074   0.814 1.319          900
                                    1000   1.142 0.855 1.336    1.167 0.870 1.341           1.090   0.830 1.313        1000

                                    Temp.         Carbon                Carbon                  Hydrogen, H2           Temp.
                                      K        Dioxide, CO2         Monoxide, CO                                         K

                                      250  0.791  0.602  1.314  1.039  0.743         1.400  14.051   9.927      1.416    250
                                      300  0.846  0.657  1.288  1.040  0.744         1.399  14.307  10.183      1.405    300
                                      350  0.895  0.706  1.268  1.043  0.746         1.398  14.427  10.302      1.400    350

                                    400 0.939 0.750 1.252 1.047 0.751 1.395 14.476 10.352 1.398 400
                                    450 0.978 0.790 1.239 1.054 0.757 1.392 14.501 10.377 1.398 450
                                    500 1.014 0.825 1.229 1.063 0.767 1.387 14.513 10.389 1.397 500

                                    550 1.046 0.857 1.220 1.075 0.778 1.382 14.530 10.405 1.396 550
                                    600 1.075 0.886 1.213 1.087 0.790 1.376 14.546 10.422 1.396 600
                                    650 1.102 0.913 1.207 1.100 0.803 1.370 14.571 10.447 1.395 650

                                    700 1.126 0.937 1.202 1.113 0.816 1.364 14.604 10.480 1.394 700
                                    750 1.148 0.959 1.197 1.126 0.829 1.358 14.645 10.521 1.392 750
                                    800 1.169 0.980 1.193 1.139 0.842 1.353 14.695 10.570 1.390 800

                                      900 1.204 1.015 1.186 1.163 0.866 1.343 14.822 10.698 1.385 900
                                    1000 1.234 1.045 1.181 1.185 0.888 1.335 14.983 10.859 1.380 1000

                                    Source: Adapted from K. Wark, Thermodynamics, 4th ed., McGraw-Hill, New York, 1983, as based on "Tables
                                    of Thermal Properties of Gases," NBS Circular 564, 1955.

Table A-20
                                                                                                                Tables in SI Units 755

TABLE A-21 Variation of cp with Temperature for Selected Ideal Gases
                                         cp  a  bT  gT 2  dT 3  eT 4
                                         R

                  T is in K, equations valid from 300 to 1000 K

Gas                 103      106                                        109    1012

CO         3.710  1.619        3.692                              2.032        0.240
CO2        2.401    8.735   6.607                                    2.002     0
H2         3.057    2.677   5.810                                    5.521   1.812
H2O        4.070                                                               0.807
                  1.108        4.152                              2.964
O2         3.626                                                               2.156
N2         3.675  1.878        7.055                              6.764      0.226
Air        3.653  1.208        2.324                              0.632
SO2        3.267  1.337        3.294                              1.913        0.2763
                               0.684                              5.281        2.559
CH4        3.826    5.324
C2H2       1.410             24.558                              22.733        6.963
C2H4       1.426  3.979    24.501                                  16.391    4.135
                   19.057
Monatomic  2.5     11.383      7.989                             16.254        6.749
   gasesa
                    0          0                                     0         0

a For monatomic gases, such as He, Ne, and Ar, cp is constant over a wide temperature range and is very nearly
equal to 52 R.

Source: Adapted from K. Wark, Thermodynamics, 4th ed., McGraw-Hill, New York, 1983, as based on NASA
SP-273, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, DC, 1971.

                                                                                                                                        Table A-21
            756 Tables in SI Units

Table A-22  TABLE A-22 Ideal Gas Properties of Air

                                                        T(K), h and u(kJ/kg), s (kJ/kg # K)

                                                    when s  01                                                    when s  0

            T  h  u                 s               pr                        vr     T  h        u       s        pr      vr

            200 199.97 142.56 1.29559               0.3363  1707.                    450 451.80  322.62  2.11161  5.775   223.6
            210 209.97 149.69 1.34444               0.3987  1512.                    460 462.02  329.97  2.13407  6.245   211.4
            220 219.97 156.82 1.39105               0.4690  1346.                    470 472.24  337.32  2.15604  6.742   200.1
            230 230.02 164.00 1.43557               0.5477  1205.                    480 482.49  344.70  2.17760  7.268   189.5
            240 240.02 171.13 1.47824               0.6355  1084.                    490 492.74  352.08  2.19876  7.824   179.7

            250 250.05 178.28 1.51917               0.7329                    979.   500 503.02  359.49  2.21952   8.411  170.6
            260 260.09 185.45 1.55848               0.8405                    887.8  510 513.32  366.92  2.23993   9.031  162.1
            270 270.11 192.60 1.59634               0.9590                    808.0  520 523.63  374.36  2.25997   9.684  154.1
            280 280.13 199.75 1.63279               1.0889                    738.0  530 533.98  381.84  2.27967  10.37   146.7
            285 285.14 203.33 1.65055               1.1584                    706.1  540 544.35  389.34  2.29906  11.10   139.7

            290 290.16 206.91 1.66802               1.2311                    676.1  550 554.74  396.86  2.31809  11.86   133.1
            295 295.17 210.49 1.68515               1.3068                    647.9  560 565.17  404.42  2.33685  12.66   127.0
            300 300.19 214.07 1.70203               1.3860                    621.2  570 575.59  411.97  2.35531  13.50   121.2
            305 305.22 217.67 1.71865               1.4686                    596.0  580 586.04  419.55  2.37348  14.38   115.7
            310 310.24 221.25 1.73498               1.5546                    572.3  590 596.52  427.15  2.39140  15.31   110.6

            315 315.27 224.85 1.75106               1.6442                    549.8  600 607.02  434.78  2.40902  16.28   105.8
            320 320.29 228.42 1.76690               1.7375                    528.6  610 617.53  442.42  2.42644  17.30   101.2
            325 325.31 232.02 1.78249               1.8345                    508.4  620 628.07  450.09  2.44356  18.36    96.92
            330 330.34 235.61 1.79783               1.9352                    489.4  630 638.63  457.78  2.46048  19.84    92.84
            340 340.42 242.82 1.82790               2.149                     454.1  640 649.22  465.50  2.47716  20.64    88.99

            350 350.49 250.02 1.85708               2.379                     422.2  650 659.84  473.25  2.49364  21.86   85.34
            360 360.58 257.24 1.88543               2.626                     393.4  660 670.47  481.01  2.50985  23.13   81.89
            370 370.67 264.46 1.91313               2.892                     367.2  670 681.14  488.81  2.52589  24.46   78.61
            380 380.77 271.69 1.94001               3.176                     343.4  680 691.82  496.62  2.54175  25.85   75.50
            390 390.88 278.93 1.96633               3.481                     321.5  690 702.52  504.45  2.55731  27.29   72.56

            400 400.98 286.16 1.99194               3.806                     301.6  700 713.27  512.33  2.57277  28.80   69.76
            410 411.12 293.43 2.01699               4.153                     283.3  710 724.04  520.23  2.58810  30.38   67.07
            420 421.26 300.69 2.04142               4.522                     266.6  720 734.82  528.14  2.60319  32.02   64.53
            430 431.43 307.99 2.06533               4.915                     251.1  730 745.62  536.07  2.61803  33.72   62.13
            440 441.61 315.30 2.08870               5.332                     236.8  740 756.44  544.02  2.63280  35.50   59.82

            1. pr and vr data for use with Eqs. 6.43 and 6.44, respectively.
                                                                                                        Tables in SI Units 757

TABLE A-22 (Continued)                                                                                                          Table A-22

                                        T(K), h and u(kJ/kg), s (kJ/kg # K)

                                 when s  01                                                             when s  0

T     h        u        s        pr      vr       T       h                      u                s     pr     vr

750 767.29 551.99 2.64737 37.35          57.63   1300  1395.97               1022.82           3.27345  330.9  11.275
760 778.18 560.01 2.66176 39.27          55.54   1320  1419.76               1040.88           3.29160  352.5  10.747
770 789.11 568.07 2.67595 41.31          53.39   1340  1443.60               1058.94           3.30959  375.3  10.247
780 800.03 576.12 2.69013 43.35          51.64   1360  1467.49               1077.10           3.32724  399.1   9.780
790 810.99 584.21 2.70400 45.55          49.86   1380  1491.44               1095.26           3.34474  424.2   9.337

800 821.95 592.30 2.71787 47.75          48.08   1400  1515.42               1113.52           3.36200  450.5  8.919
820 843.98 608.59 2.74504 52.59          44.84   1420  1539.44               1131.77           3.37901  478.0  8.526
840 866.08 624.95 2.77170 57.60          41.85   1440  1563.51               1150.13           3.39586  506.9  8.153
860 888.27 641.40 2.79783 63.09          39.12   1460  1587.63               1168.49           3.41247  537.1  7.801
880 910.56 657.95 2.82344 68.98          36.61   1480  1611.79               1186.95           3.42892  568.8  7.468

900 932.93     674.58   2.84856   75.29  34.31   1500  1635.97               1205.41           3.44516  601.9  7.152
920 955.38     691.28   2.87324   82.05  32.18   1520  1660.23               1223.87           3.46120  636.5  6.854
940 977.92     708.08   2.89748   89.28  30.22   1540  1684.51               1242.43           3.47712  672.8  6.569
960 1000.55    725.02   2.92128   97.00  28.40   1560  1708.82               1260.99           3.49276  710.5  6.301
980 1023.25    741.98   2.94468  105.2   26.73   1580  1733.17               1279.65           3.50829  750.0  6.046

1000  1046.04  758.94   2.96770  114.0   25.17   1600  1757.57               1298.30           3.52364  791.2  5.804
1020  1068.89  776.10   2.99034  123.4   23.72   1620  1782.00               1316.96           3.53879  834.1  5.574
1040  1091.85  793.36   3.01260  133.3   22.39   1640  1806.46               1335.72           3.55381  878.9  5.355
1060  1114.86  810.62   3.03449  143.9   21.14   1660  1830.96               1354.48           3.56867  925.6  5.147
1080  1137.89  827.88   3.05608  155.2   19.98   1680  1855.50               1373.24           3.58335  974.2  4.949

1100  1161.07  845.33   3.07732  167.1   18.896  1700  1880.1                1392.7            3.5979   1025   4.761
1120  1184.28  862.79   3.09825  179.7   17.886  1750  1941.6                1439.8            3.6336   1161   4.328
1140  1207.57  880.35   3.11883  193.1   16.946  1800  2003.3                1487.2            3.6684   1310   3.944
1160  1230.92  897.91   3.13916  207.2   16.064  1850  2065.3                1534.9            3.7023   1475   3.601
1180  1254.34  915.57   3.15916  222.2   15.241  1900  2127.4                1582.6            3.7354   1655   3.295

1200  1277.79   933.33  3.17888  238.0   14.470  1950  2189.7                1630.6            3.7677   1852   3.022
1220  1301.31   951.09  3.19834  254.7   13.747  2000  2252.1                1678.7            3.7994   2068   2.776
1240  1324.93   968.95  3.21751  272.3   13.069  2050  2314.6                1726.8            3.8303   2303   2.555
1260  1348.55   986.90  3.23638  290.8   12.435  2100  2377.4                1775.3            3.8605   2559   2.356
1280  1372.24  1004.76  3.25510  310.4   11.835  2150  2440.3                1823.8            3.8901   2837   2.175

                                                 2200 2503.2 1872.4                            3.9191   3138   2.012
                                                 2250 2566.4 1921.3                            3.9474   3464   1.864

Source: Tables A-22 are based on J. H. Keenan and J. Kaye, Gas Tables, Wiley, New York, 1945.
                                                                                                                                       Table A-23

758  TABLE A-23 Ideal Gas Properties of Selected Gases

                                                                  T(K), h and u(kJ/kmol), s°(kJ/kmol # K)

          Carbon Dioxide, CO2        Carbon Monoxide, CO                    Water Vapor, H2O                     Oxygen, O2                 Nitrogen, N2
        (h°f  393,520 kJ/kmol)     (h°f  110,530 kJ/kmol)              (h°f  241,820 kJ/kmol)                 (h°f  0 kJ/kmol)            (h°f  0 kJ/kmol)

     T  h        u      s°         h                    u     s°       h       u      s°                   h      u             s°     h     u              s°     T

     0     0        0           0     0                    0      0       0       0            0              0      0              0     0        0            0     0

     220 6,601 4,772 202.966 6,391 4,562 188.683 7,295 5,466 178.576 6,404 4,575 196.171 6,391 4,562 182.638 220

     230 6,938 5,026 204.464 6,683 4,771 189.980 7,628 5,715 180.054 6,694 4,782 197.461 6,683 4,770 183.938 230

     240 7,280 5,285 205.920 6,975 4,979 191.221 7,961 5,965 181.471 6,984 4,989 198.696 6,975 4,979 185.180 240

     250 7,627 5,548 207.337 7,266 5,188 192.411 8,294 6,215 182.831 7,275 5,197 199.885 7,266 5,188 186.370 250

     260 7,979 5,817 208.717 7,558 5,396 193.554 8,627 6,466 184.139 7,566 5,405 201.027 7,558 5,396 187.514 260
     270 8,335 6,091 210.062 7,849 5,604 194.654 8,961 6,716 185.399 7,858 5,613 202.128 7,849 5,604 188.614 270
     280 8,697 6,369 211.376 8,140 5,812 195.173 9,296 6,968 186.616 8,150 5,822 203.191 8,141 5,813 189.673 280
     290 9,063 6,651 212.660 8,432 6,020 196.735 9,631 7,219 187.791 8,443 6,032 204.218 8,432 6,021 190.695 290
     298 9,364 6,885 213.685 8,669 6,190 197.543 9,904 7,425 188.720 8,682 6,203 205.033 8,669 6,190 191.502 298

     300 9,431   6,939  213.915    8,723   6,229              197.723   9,966  7,472  188.928              8,736  6,242  205.213       8,723 6,229 191.682 300
     310 9,807   7,230  215.146    9,014   6,437              198.678  10,302  7,725  190.030              9,030  6,453  206.177       9,014 6,437 192.638 310
     320 10,186  7,526  216.351    9,306   6,645              199.603  10,639  7,978  191.098              9,325  6,664  207.112       9,306 6,645 193.562 320
     330 10,570  7,826  217.534    9,597   6,854              200.500  10,976  8,232  192.136              9,620  6,877  208.020       9,597 6,853 194.459 330
     340 10,959  8,131  218.694    9,889   7,062              201.371  11,314  8,487  193.144              9,916  7,090  208.904       9,888 7,061 195.328 340

     350 11,351  8,439  219.831    10,181  7,271              202.217  11,652  8,742 194.125 10,213 7,303 209.765 10,180 7,270 196.173 350
     360 11,748  8,752  220.948    10,473  7,480              203.040  11,992  8,998 195.081 10,511 7,518 210.604 10,471 7,478 196.995 360
     370 12,148  9,068  222.044    10,765  7,689              203.842  12,331  9,255 196.012 10,809 7,733 211.423 10,763 7,687 197.794 370
     380 12,552  9,392  223.122    11,058  7,899              204.622  12,672  9,513 196.920 11,109 7,949 212.222 11,055 7,895 198.572 380
     390 12,960  9,718  224.182    11,351  8,108              205.383  13,014  9,771 197.807 11,409 8,166 213.002 11,347 8,104 199.331 390

     400 13,372 10,046 225.225 11,644 8,319 206.125 13,356 10,030 198.673 11,711 8,384 213.765 11,640 8,314 200.071 400
     410 13,787 10,378 226.250 11,938 8,529 206.850 13,699 10,290 199.521 12,012 8,603 214.510 11,932 8,523 200,794 410
     420 14,206 10,714 227.258 12,232 8,740 207.549 14,043 10,551 200.350 12,314 8,822 215.241 12,225 8,733 201.499 420
     430 14,628 11,053 228.252 12,526 8,951 208.252 14,388 10,813 201.160 12,618 9,043 215.955 12,518 8,943 202.189 430
     440 15,054 11,393 229.230 12,821 9,163 208.929 14,734 11,075 201.955 12,923 9,264 216.656 12,811 9,153 202.863 440

     450 15,483 11,742 230.194 13,116 9,375 209.593 15,080 11,339 202.734 13,228 9,487 217.342 13,105 9,363 203.523 450
     460 15,916 12,091 231.144 13,412 9,587 210.243 15,428 11,603 203.497 13,535 9,710 218.016 13,399 9,574 204.170 460
     470 16,351 12,444 232.080 13,708 9,800 210.880 15,777 11,869 204.247 13,842 9,935 218.676 13,693 9,786 204.803 470
     480 16,791 12,800 233.004 14,005 10,014 211.504 16,126 12,135 204.982 14,151 10,160 219.326 13,988 9,997 205.424 480
     490 17,232 13,158 233.916 14,302 10,228 212.117 16,477 12,403 205.705 14,460 10,386 219.963 14,285 10,210 206.033 490

     500 17,678 13,521 234.814 14,600 10,443 212.719 16,828 12,671 206.413 14,770 10,614 220.589 14,581 10,423 206.630 500
     510 18,126 13,885 235.700 14,898 10,658 213.310 17,181 12,940 207.112 15,082 10,842 221.206 14,876 10,635 207.216 510
     520 18,576 14,253 236.575 15,197 10,874 213.890 17,534 13,211 207.799 15,395 11,071 221.812 15,172 10,848 207.792 520
     530 19,029 14,622 237.439 15,497 11,090 214.460 17,889 13,482 208.475 15,708 11,301 222.409 15,469 11,062 208.358 530
     540 19,485 14,996 238.292 15,797 11,307 215.020 18,245 13,755 209.139 16,022 11,533 222.997 15,766 11,277 208.914 540

     550 19,945 15,372 239.135 16,097 11,524 215.572 18,601 14,028 209.795 16,338 11,765 223.576 16,064 11,492 209.461 550
     560 20,407 15,751 239.962 16,399 11,743 216.115 18,959 14,303 210.440 16,654 11,998 224.146 16,363 11,707 209.999 560
     570 20,870 16,131 240.789 16,701 11,961 216.649 19,318 14,579 211.075 16,971 12,232 224.708 16,662 11,923 210.528 570
     580 21,337 16,515 241.602 17,003 12,181 217.175 19.678 14,856 211.702 17,290 12,467 225.262 16,962 12,139 211.049 580
     590 21,807 16,902 242.405 17,307 12,401 217.693 20,039 15,134 212.320 17,609 12,703 225.808 17,262 12,356 211.562 590
     TABLE A-23 (Continued)

                                           T(K), h and u(kJ/kmol), s°(kJ/kmol # K)

           Carbon Dioxide, CO2     Carbon Monoxide, CO        Water Vapor, H2O            Oxygen, O2              Nitrogen, N2
        (h°f  393,520 kJ/kmol)   (h°f  110,530 kJ/kmol)  (h°f  241,820 kJ/kmol)        (h°f  0 kJ/kmol)         (h°f  0 kJ/kmol)

     T  h  u                 s°  h  u  s°                h  u  s°                   h  u                 s°  h  u                 s°  T

759  600 22,280 17,291 243.199 17,611 12,622 218.204 20,402 15,413 212.920 17,929 12,940 226.346 17,563 12,574 212.066 600
     610 22,754 17,683 243.983 17,915 12,843 218.708 20,765 15,693 213.529 18,250 13,178 226.877 17,864 12,792 212.564 610
     620 23,231 18,076 244.758 18,221 13,066 219.205 21,130 15,975 214.122 18,572 13,417 227.400 18,166 13,011 213.055 620
     630 23,709 18,471 245.524 18,527 13,289 219.695 21,495 16,257 214.707 18,895 13,657 227.918 18,468 13,230 213.541 630
     640 24,190 18,869 246.282 18,833 13,512 220.179 21,862 16,541 215.285 19,219 13,898 228.429 18,772 13,450 214.018 640

     650 24,674 19,270 247.032 19,141 13,736 220.656 22,230 16,826 215.856 19,544 14,140 228.932 19,075 13,671 214.489 650
     660 25,160 19,672 247,773 19,449 13,962 221.127 22,600 17,112 216.419 19,870 14,383 229.430 19,380 13,892 214.954 660
     670 25,648 20,078 248.507 19,758 14,187 221.592 22,970 17,399 216.976 20,197 14,626 229.920 19,685 14,114 215.413 670
     680 26,138 20,484 249.233 20,068 14,414 222.052 23,342 17,688 217.527 20,524 14,871 230.405 19,991 14,337 215.866 680
     690 26,631 20,894 249.952 20,378 14,641 222.505 23,714 17,978 218.071 20,854 15,116 230.885 20,297 14,560 216.314 690

     700 27,125 21,305 250.663 20,690 14,870 222.953 24,088 18,268 218.610 21,184 15,364 231.358 20,604 14,784 216.756 700
     710 27,622 21,719 251.368 21,002 15,099 223.396 24,464 18,561 219.142 21,514 15,611 231.827 20,912 15,008 217.192 710
     720 28,121 22,134 252.065 21,315 15,328 223.833 24,840 18,854 219.668 21,845 15,859 232.291 21,220 15,234 217.624 720
     730 28,622 22,552 252.755 21,628 15,558 224.265 25,218 19,148 220.189 22,177 16,107 232.748 21,529 15,460 218.059 730
     740 29,124 22,972 253.439 21,943 15,789 224.692 25,597 19,444 220.707 22,510 16,357 233.201 21,839 15,686 218.472 740

     750 29,629 23,393 254.117 22,258 16,022 225.115 25,977 19,741 221.215 22,844 16,607 233.649 22,149 15,913 218.889 750
     760 30,135 23,817 254.787 22,573 16,255 225.533 26,358 20,039 221.720 23,178 16,859 234.091 22,460 16,141 219.301 760
     770 30,644 24,242 255,452 22,890 16,488 225.947 26,741 20,339 222.221 23,513 17,111 234.528 22,772 16,370 219.709 770
     780 31,154 24,669 256.110 23,208 16,723 226.357 27,125 20,639 222.717 23,850 17,364 234.960 23,085 16,599 220.113 780
     790 31,665 25,097 256.762 23,526 16,957 226.762 27,510 20,941 223.207 24,186 17,618 235.387 23,398 16,830 220.512 790

     800 32,179 25,527 257.408 23,844 17,193 227.162 27,896 21,245 223.693 24,523 17,872 235.810 23,714 17,061 220.907 800
     810 32,694 25,959 258.048 24,164 17,429 227.559 28,284 21,549 224.174 24,861 18,126 236.230 24,027 17,292 221.298 810
     820 33,212 26,394 258.682 24,483 17,665 227.952 28,672 21,855 224.651 25,199 18,382 236.644 24,342 17,524 221.684 820
     830 33,730 26,829 259.311 24,803 17,902 228.339 29,062 22,162 225.123 25,537 18,637 237.055 24,658 17,757 222.067 830
     840 34,251 27,267 259.934 25,124 18,140 228.724 29,454 22,470 225.592 25,877 18,893 237.462 24,974 17,990 222.447 840

     850 34,773 27,706 260.551 25,446 18,379 229,106 29,846 22,779 226.057 26,218 19,150 237.864 25,292 18,224 222.822 850
     860 35,296 28,125 261.164 25,768 18,617 229,482 30,240 23,090 226.517 26,559 19,408 238.264 25,610 18,459 223.194 860
     870 35,821 28,588 261.770 26.091 18,858 229.856 30,635 23,402 226.973 26,899 19,666 238.660 25,928 18,695 223.562 870
     880 36,347 29,031 262.371 26,415 19,099 230.227 31,032 23,715 227.426 27,242 19,925 239.051 26,248 18,931 223.927 880
     890 36,876 29,476 262.968 26,740 19,341 230.593 31,429 24,029 227.875 27,584 20,185 239.439 26,568 19,168 224.288 890

     900 37,405 29,922 263.559 27,066 19,583 230.957 31,828 24,345 228.321 27,928 20,445 239.823 26,890 19,407 224.647 900
     910 37,935 30,369 264.146 27,392 19,826 231.317 32,228 24,662 228.763 28,272 20,706 240.203 27,210 19,644 225.002 910
     920 38,467 30,818 264.728 27,719 20,070 231.674 32,629 24,980 229.202 28,616 20,967 240.580 27,532 19,883 225.353 920
     930 39,000 31,268 265.304 28,046 20,314 232.028 33,032 25,300 229.637 28,960 21,228 240.953 27,854 20,122 225.701 930
     940 39,535 31,719 265.877 28,375 20,559 232.379 33,436 25,621 230.070 29,306 21,491 241.323 28,178 20,362 226.047 940

     950 40,070 32,171 266.444 28,703 20,805 232.727 33,841 25,943 230.499 29,652 21,754 241.689 28,501 20,603 226.389 950
     960 40,607 32,625 267.007 29,033 21,051 233.072 34,247 26,265 230.924 29,999 22,017 242.052 28,826 20,844 226.728 960
     970 41,145 33,081 267.566 29,362 21,298 233.413 34,653 26,588 231.347 30,345 22,280 242.411 29,151 21,086 227.064 970
     980 41,685 33,537 268.119 29,693 21,545 233.752 35,061 26,913 231.767 30,692 22,544 242.768 29,476 21,328 227.398 980
     990 42,226 33,995 268.670 30,024 21,793 234.088 35,472 27,240 232.184 31.041 22,809 243.120 29,803 21,571 227.728 990

                                                                                                             Table A-23
                                                                                                                            Table A-23

760  TABLE A-23 (Continued)

                                                          T(K), h and u(kJ/kmol), s°(kJ/kmol # K)

             Carbon Dioxide, CO2        Carbon Monoxide, CO         Water Vapor, H2O                     Oxygen, O2              Nitrogen, N2
           (h°f  393,520 kJ/kmol)     (h°f  110,530 kJ/kmol)   (h°f  241,820 kJ/kmol)                 (h°f  0 kJ/kmol)         (h°f  0 kJ/kmol)

        T  h       u         s°       h       u       s°       h       u       s°                  h       u            s°  h       u            s°    T

     1000  42,769  34,455    269.215  30,355  22,041  234.421  35,882  27,568  232.597             31,389  23,075  243.471  30,129  21,815  228.057  1000
     1020  43,859  35,378    270.293  31,020  22,540  235.079  36,709  28,228  233.415             32,088  23,607  244.164  30,784  22,304  228.706  1020
     1040  44,953  36,306    271.354  31,688  23,041  235.728  37,542  28,895  234.223             32,789  24,142  244.844  31,442  22,795  229.344  1040
     1060  46,051  37,238    272.400  32,357  23,544  236.364  38,380  29,567  235.020             33,490  24,677  245.513  32,101  23,288  229.973  1060
     1080  47,153  38,174    273.430  33,029  24,049  236.992  39,223  30,243  235.806             34,194  25,214  246.171  32,762  23,782  230.591  1080

     1100  48,258  39,112    274.445  33,702  24,557  237.609  40,071  30,925  236.584             34,899  25,753  246.818  33,426  24,280  231.199  1100
     1120  49,369  40,057    275.444  34,377  25,065  238.217  40,923  31,611  237.352             35,606  26,294  247.454  34,092  24,780  231.799  1120
     1140  50,484  41,006    276.430  35,054  25,575  238.817  41,780  32,301  238.110             36,314  26,836  248.081  34,760  25,282  232.391  1140
     1160  51,602  41,957    277.403  35,733  26,088  239.407  42,642  32,997  238.859             37,023  27,379  248.698  35,430  25,786  232.973  1160
     1180  52,724  42,913    278.362  36,406  26,602  239.989  43,509  33,698  239.600             37,734  27,923  249.307  36,104  26,291  233.549  1180

     1200  53,848  43,871    279.307  37,095  27,118  240.663  44,380  34,403  240.333             38,447  28,469  249.906  36,777  26,799  234.115  1200
     1220  54,977  44,834    280.238  37,780  27,637  241.128  45,256  35,112  241.057             39,162  29,018  250.497  37,452  27,308  234.673  1220
     1240  56,108  45,799    281.158  38,466  28,426  241.686  46,137  35,827  241.773             39,877  29,568  251.079  38,129  27,819  235.223  1240
     1260  57,244  46,768    282.066  39,154  28,678  242.236  47,022  36,546  242.482             40,594  30,118  251.653  38,807  28,331  235.766  1260
     1280  58,381  47,739    282.962  39,884  29,201  242.780  47,912  37,270  243.183             41,312  30,670  252.219  39,488  28,845  236.302  1280

     1300  59,522  48,713    283.847  40,534  29,725  243.316  48,807  38,000  243.877             42,033  31,224  252.776  40,170  29,361  236.831  1300
     1320  60,666  49,691    284.722  41,266  30,251  243.844  49,707  38,732  244.564             42,753  31,778  253.325  40,853  29,878  237.353  1320
     1340  61,813  50,672    285.586  41,919  30,778  244.366  50,612  39,470  245.243             43,475  32,334  253.868  41,539  30,398  237.867  1340
     1360  62,963  51,656    286.439  42,613  31,306  244.880  51,521  40,213  245.915             44,198  32,891  254.404  42,227  30,919  238.376  1360
     1380  64,116  52,643    287.283  43,309  31,836  245.388  52,434  40,960  246.582             44,923  33,449  254.932  42,915  31,441  238.878  1380

     1400  65,271  53,631    288.106  44,007  32,367  245.889  53,351  41,711  247.241             45,648  34,008  255.454  43,605  31,964  239.375  1400
     1420  66,427  54,621    288.934  44,707  32,900  246.385  54,273  42,466  247.895             46,374  34,567  255.968  44,295  32,489  239.865  1420
     1440  67,586  55,614    289.743  45,408  33,434  246.876  55,198  43,226  248.543             47,102  35,129  256.475  44,988  33,014  240.350  1440
     1460  68,748  56,609    290.542  46,110  33,971  247.360  56,128  43,989  249.185             47,831  35,692  256.978  45,682  33,543  240.827  1460
     1480  69,911  57,606    291.333  46,813  34,508  247.839  57,062  44,756  249.820             48,561  36,256  257.474  46,377  34,071  241.301  1480

     1500  71,078  58,606    292.114  47,517  35,046  248.312  57,999  45,528  250.450             49,292  36,821  257.965  47,073  34,601  241.768  1500
     1520  72,246  59,609    292.888  48,222  35,584  248.778  58,942  46,304  251.074             50,024  37,387  258.450  47,771  35,133  242.228  1520
     1540  73,417  60,613    292.654  48,928  36,124  249.240  59,888  47,084  251.693             50,756  37,952  258.928  48,470  35,665  242.685  1540
     1560  74,590  61,620    294.411  49,635  36,665  249.695  60,838  47,868  252.305             51,490  38,520  259.402  49,168  36,197  243.137  1560
     1580  76,767  62,630    295.161  50,344  37,207  250.147  61,792  48,655  252.912             52,224  39,088  259.870  49,869  36,732  243.585  1580

     1600  76,944  63,741    295.901  51,053  37,750  250.592  62,748  49,445  253.513             52,961  39,658  260.333  50,571  37,268  244.028  1600
     1620  78,123  64,653    296.632  51,763  38,293  251.033  63,709  52,240  254.111             53,696  40,227  260.791  51,275  37,806  244.464  1620
     1640  79,303  65,668    297.356  52,472  38,837  251.470  64,675  51,039  254.703             54,434  40,799  261.242  51,980  38,344  244.896  1640
     1660  80,486  66,592    298.072  53,184  39,382  251.901  65,643  51,841  255.290             55,172  41,370  261.690  52,686  38,884  245.324  1660
     1680  81,670  67,702    298.781  53,895  39,927  252.329  66,614  52,646  255.873             55,912  41,944  262.132  53,393  39,424  245.747  1680

     1700  82,856  68,721 299.482     54,609 40,474 252.751    67,589  53,455 256.450              56,652 42,517 262.571    54,099 39,965 246.166    1700
     1720  84,043  69,742 300.177     55,323 41,023 253.169    68,567  54,267 257.022              57,394 43,093 263.005    54,807 40,507 246.580    1720
     1740  85,231  70,764 300.863     56,039 41,572 253.582    69,550  55,083 257.589              58,136 43,669 263.435    55,516 41,049 246.990    1740
     TABLE A-23 (Continued)

                                                           T(K), h and u(kJ/kmol), s°(kJ/kmol # K)

             Carbon Dioxide, CO2        Carbon Monoxide, CO          Water Vapor, H2O                               Oxygen, O2               Nitrogen, N2
           (h°f  393,520 kJ/kmol)     (h°f  110,530 kJ/kmol)    (h°f  241,820 kJ/kmol)                           (h°f  0 kJ/kmol)          (h°f  0 kJ/kmol)

     T     h        u        s°       h        u       s°       h                           u        s°       h        u           s°   h        u           s°     T

     1760   86,420   71,787  301.543   56,756  42,123  253.991   70,535                      55,902  258.151   58,800  44,247  263.861  56,227   41,594  247.396  1760
     1780   87,612   72,812  302.271   57,473  42,673  254.398   71,523                      56,723  258.708   59,624  44,825  264.283  56,938   42,139  247.798  1780
     1800   88,806   73,840  302.884   58,191  43,225  254.797   72,513                      57,547  259.262   60,371  45,405  264.701  57,651   42,685  248.195  1800
     1820   90,000   74,868  303.544   58,910  43,778  255.194   73,507                      58,375  259.811   61,118  45,986  265.113  58,363   43,231  248.589  1820
     1840   91,196   75,897  304.198   59,629  44,331  255.587   74,506                      59,207  260.357   61,866  46,568  265.521  59,075   43,777  248.979  1840

     1860   92,394   76,929  304.845   60,351  44,886  255.976   75,506                      60,042  260.898   62,616  47,151  265.925  59,790   44,324  249.365  1860
     1880   93,593   77,962  305.487   61,072  45,441  256.361   76,511                      60,880  261.436   63,365  47,734  266.326  60,504   44,873  249.748  1880
     1900   94,793   78,996  306.122   61,794  45,997  256.743   77,517                      61,720  261.969   64,116  48,319  266.722  61,220   45,423  250.128  1900
     1920   95,995   80,031  306.751   62,516  46,552  257.122   78,527                      62,564  262.497   64,868  48,904  267.115  61,936   45,973  250.502  1920
     1940   97,197   81,067  307.374   63,238  47,108  257.497   79,540                      63,411  263.022   65,620  49,490  267.505  62,654   46,524  250.874  1940

     1960   98,401   82,105  307.992   63,961  47,665  257.868   80,555                      64,259  263.542   66,374  50,078  267.891  63,381   47,075  251.242  1960
     1980   99,606   83,144  308.604   64,684  48,221  258.236   81,573                      65,111  264.059   67,127  50,665  268.275  64,090   47,627  251.607  1980
     2000  100,804   84,185  309.210   65,408  48,780  258.600   82,593                      65,965  264.571   67,881  51,253  268.655  64,810   48,181  251.969  2000
     2050  103,835   86,791  310.701   67,224  50,179  259.494   85,156                      68,111  265.838   69,772  52,727  269.588  66,612   49,567  252.858  2050
     2100  106,864   89,404  312.160   69,044  51,584  260.370   87,735                      70,275  267.081   71,668  54,208  270.504  68,417   50,957  253.726  2100

     2150  109,898   92,023  313.589   70,864  52,988  261.226   90,330                      72,454  268.301   73,573  55,697  271.399  70,226   52,351  254.578  2150
     2200  112,939   94,648  314.988   72,688  54,396  262.065   92,940                      74,649  269.500   75,484  57,192  272.278  72,040   53,749  255.412  2200
     2250  115,984   97,277  316.356   74,516  55,809  262.887   95,562                      76,855  270.679   77,397  58,690  273.136  73,856   55,149  256.227  2250
     2300  119,035   99,912  317.695   76,345  57,222  263.692   98,199                      79,076  271.839   79,316  60,193  273.981  75,676   56,553  257.027  2300
     2350  122,091  102,552  319.011   78,178  58,640  264.480  100,846                      81,308  272.978   81,243  61,704  274.809  77,496   57,958  257.810  2350

     2400  125,152  105,197  320.302   80,015  60,060  265.253  103,508                      83,553  274.098   83,174  63,219  275.625  79,320   59,366  258.580  2400
     2450  128,219  107,849  321.566   81,852  61,482  266.012  106,183                      85,811  275.201   85,112  64,742  276.424  81,149   60,779  259.332  2450
     2500  131,290  110,504  322.808   83,692  62,906  266.755  108,868                      88,082  276.286   87,057  66,271  277.207  82,981   62,195  260.073  2500
     2550  134,368  113,166  324.026   85,537  64,335  267.485  111,565                      90,364  277.354   89,004  67,802  277.979  84,814   63,613  260.799  2550
     2600  137,449  115,832  325.222   87,383  65,766  268.202  114,273                      92,656  278.407   90,956  69,339  278.738  86,650   65,033  261.512  2600

     2650  140,533  118,500  326.396   89,230  67,197  268.905  116,991                      94,958  279,441   92,916  70,883  279.485  88,488   66,455  262.213  2650
     2700  143,620  121,172  327.549   91,077  68,628  269.596  119,717                      97,269  280.462   94,881  72,433  280.219  90,328   67,880  262.902  2700
     2750  146,713  123,849  328.684   92,930  70,066  270.285  122,453                      99,588  281.464   96,852  73,987  280.942  92,171   69,306  263.577  2750
     2800  149,808  126,528  329.800   94,784  71,504  270.943  125,198                     101,917  282.453   98,826  75,546  281.654  94,014   70,734  264.241  2800
     2850  152,908  129,212  330.896   96,639  72,945  271.602  127,952                     104,256  283.429  100,808  77,112  282.357  95,859   72,163  264.895  2850

     2900  156,009  131,898  331.975   98,495  74,383  272.249  130,717                     106,605  284.390  102,793  78,682  283.048   97,705  73,593  265.538  2900
     2950  159,117  134,589  333.037  100,352  75,825  272.884  133,486                     108,959  285.338  104,785  80,258  283.728   99,556  75,028  266.170  2950
     3000  162,226  137,283  334.084  102,210  77,267  273.508  136,264                     111,321  286.273  106,780  81,837  284.399  101,407  76,464  266.793  3000
     3050  165,341  139,982  335.114  104,073  78,715  274.123  139,051                     113,692  287.194  108,778  83,419  285.060  103,260  77,902  267.404  3050
     3100  168,456  142,681  336.126  105,939  80,164  274.730  141,846                     116,072  288.102  110,784  85,009  285.713  105,115  79,341  268.007  3100

     3150  171,576  145,385  337.124  107,802  81,612  275.326  144,648                     118,458  288.999  112,795  86,601  286.355  106,972 80,782 268.601    3150
     3200  174,695  148,089  338.109  109,667  83,061  275.914  147,457                     120,851  289.884  114,809  88,203  286.989  108,830 82,224 269.186    3200
     3250  177,822  150,801  339.069  111,534  84,513  276.494  150,272                     123,250  290.756  116,827  89,804  287.614  110,690 83,668 269.763    3250

761  Source: Tables A-23 are based on the JANAF Thermochemical Tables, NSRDS-NBS-37, 1971.

                                                                                                                                        Table A-23
            762 Tables in SI Units

            TABLE A-24 Constants for the van der Waals, Redlich­Kwong, and Benedict­Webb­Rubin Equations of State

            1. van der Waals and Redlich­Kwong: Constants for pressure in bar, specific volume in m3/kmol, and temperature in K

                                                                 van der Waals                                   Redlich­Kwong

                                                           a                      b                        a                       b
                                                                                 m3                                               m3
            Substance                               bar a  m3      2                                bar a  m3      2
                                                                                kmol                                             kmol
                                                           kmol  b                                         kmol  b K12

Table A-24  Air                                      1.368                      0.0367                  15.989                   0.02541
            Butane (C4H10)                          13.86                       0.1162                 289.55                    0.08060
            Carbon dioxide (CO2)                                                0.0428                                           0.02963
                                                     3.647                                              64.43
            Carbon monoxide (CO)                                                0.0395                                           0.02737
            Methane (CH4)                            1.474                      0.0428                  17.22                    0.02965
            Nitrogen (N2)                            2.293                      0.0386                  32.11                    0.02677
                                                     1.366                                              15.53
            Oxygen (O2)                                                         0.0317                                           0.02197
            Propane (C3H8)                           1.369                      0.0901                  17.22                    0.06242
            Refrigerant 12                           9.349                      0.0971                 182.23                    0.06731
                                                    10.49                                              208.59

            Sulfur dioxide (SO2)                    6.883                       0.0569                 144.80                    0.03945
            Water (H2O)                             5.531                       0.0305                 142.59                    0.02111

            Source: Calculated from critical data.

            2. Benedict­Webb­Rubin: Constants for pressure in bar, specific volume in m3/kmol, and temperature in K

            Substance  a            A                      b          B                 c           C                                

            C4H10      1.9073       10.218          0.039998          0.12436   3.206  105          1.006  106   1.101  103      0.0340
            CO2        0.1386        2.7737         0.007210          0.04991   1.512  104          1.404  105   8.47  105       0.00539
            CO         0.0371        1.3590         0.002632          0.05454   1.054  103          8.676  103   1.350  104      0.0060

            CH4        0.0501       1.8796 0.003380 0.04260 2.579  103 2.287  104 1.244  104                                     0.0060
                                                                                                                                 0.0053
            N2         0.0254       1.0676 0.002328 0.04074 7.381  102 8.166  103 1.272  104

            Source: H. W. Cooper and J. C. Goldfrank, Hydrocarbon Processing, 46 (12): 141 (1967).
                                                                                       Tables in SI Units 763

TABLE A-25 Thermochemical Properties of Selected Substances at 298K and 1 atm

                                                                                              Heating Values

Substance          Formula    Molar Mass,   Enthalpy of    Gibbs Function        Absolute     Higher,  Lower,                      Table A-25
                              M (kg/kmol)  Formation, h°f   of Formation,       Entropy, s°    HHV      LHV
Carbon             C(s)                                     g°f (kJ/kmol)      (kJ/kmol # K)  (kJ/kg)  (kJ/kg)
Hydrogen           H2(g)          12.01      (kJ/kmol)
Nitrogen           N2(g)           2.016                                 0           5.74      32,770   32,770
Oxygen             O2(g)          28.01                 0                0        130.57      141,780  119,950
                                  32.00                 0                0        191.50
Carbon monoxide    CO(g)                                0                0        205.03         --       --
Carbon dioxide     CO2(g)         28.01                 0                                        --       --
Water              H2O(g)         44.01                       137,150             197.54
Water              H2O(l)         18.02      110,530          394,380             213.69         --       --
                                  18.02      393,520          228,590             188.72         --       --
Hydrogen peroxide  H2O2(g)                   241,820          237,180               69.95        --       --
Ammonia            NH3(g)         34.02      285,830                                             --       --
Oxygen             O(g)           17.03                       105,600             232.63
Hydrogen           H(g)           16.00      136,310           16,590             192.33         --       --
                                              46,190            231,770           160.95         --       --
                                   1.008       249,170          203,290           114.61         --       --
                                               218,000                                           --       --

Nitrogen           N(g)       14.01         472,680         455,510            153.19          --       --
Hydroxyl           OH(g)      17.01          39,460          34,280            183.75          --       --
Methane            CH4(g)     16.04        74,850          50,790              186.16         55,510   50,020
Acetylene          C2H2(g)    26.04         226,730         209,170            200.85         49,910   48,220

Ethylene           C2H2(g)    28.05            52,280        68,120            219.83         50,300   47,160
Ethane             C2H6(g)    30.07         84,680         32,890              229.49         51,870   47,480
Propylene          C3H6(g)    42.08                                            266.94         48,920   45,780
Propane            C3H8(g)    44.09            20,410        62,720            269.91         50,350   46,360
                                           103,850         23,490

Butane             C4H10(g)    58.12       126,150         15,710              310.03         49,500   45,720
Pentane            C5H12(g)    72.15       146,440          8,200              348.40         49,010   45,350
Octane             C8H18(g)   114.22       208,450           17,320            463.67         48,260   44,790
Octane             C8H18(l)   114.22       249,910                             360.79         47,900   44,430
Benzene            C6H6(g)     78.11                           6,610           269.20         42,270   40,580
                                               82,930       129,660

Methyl alcohol     CH3OH(g)   32.04        200,890         162,140             239.70         23,850   21,110
Methyl alcohol     CH3OH(l)   32.04        238,810         166,290             126.80         22,670   19,920
Ethyl alcohol      C2H5OH(g)  46.07        235,310         168,570             282.59         30,590   27,720
Ethyl alcohol      C2H5OH(l)  46.07        277,690                             160.70         29,670   26,800
                                                             174,890

Source: Based on JANAF Thermochemical Tables, NSRDS-NBS-37, 1971; Selected Values of Chemical Thermodynamic Properties, NBS Tech.
Note 270-3, 1968; and API Research Project 44, Carnegie Press, 1953. Heating values calculated.
            764 Tables in SI Units

                                    TABLE A-26 Standard Molar Chemical Exergy, e ch (kJ/kmol), of
                                    Selected Substances at 298 K and p0

                                    Substance          Formula    Model Ia   Model IIb

                                    Nitrogen             N2(g)       640        720
                                    Oxygen               O2(g)     3,950      3,970
                                    Carbon dioxide     CO2(g)     14,175     19,870
                                    Water              H2O(g)      8,635      9,500
                                    Water              H2O(l)
                                                                       45       900

                                    Carbon (graphite)     C(s)    404,590    410,260
                                    Hydrogen            H2(g)     235,250    236,100
                                    Sulfur                        598,160    609,600
                                    Carbon monoxide       S(s)    269,410    275,100
                                    Sulfur dioxide     CO(g)      301,940    313,400
                                                       SO2(g)

                                    Nitrogen monoxide   NO(g)        88,850     88,900
                                    Nitrogen dioxide                 55,565     55,600
                                    Hydrogen sulfide   NO2(g)       799,890    812,000
                                    Ammonia             H2S(g)      336,685    337,900
                                    Methane            NH3(g)       824,350    831,650
                                    Ethane             CH4(g)     1,482,035  1,495,840
                                                       C2H6(g)

Table A-26                          Methyl alcohol     CH3OH(g)     715,070    722,300
                                    Methyl alcohol      CH3OH(l)    710,745    718,000
                                    Ethyl alcohol      C2H5OH(g)  1,348,330  1,363,900
                                    Ethyl alcohol      C2H5OH(l)  1,342,085  1,357,700

                                    aJ. Ahrendts, "Die Exergie Chemisch Reaktionsf ähiger Systeme,'' VDI-
                                    Forschungsheft, VDI-Verlag, Dusseldorf, 579, 1977. Also see "Reference
                                    States,'' Energy--The International Journal, 5: 667­677, 1980. In Model I,
                                    p0  1.019 atm. This model attempts to impose a criterion that the reference
                                    environment be in equilibrium. The reference substances are determined
                                    assuming restricted chemical equilibrium for nitric acid and nitrates and
                                    unrestricted thermodynamic equilibrium for all other chemical components of
                                    the atmosphere, the oceans, and a portion of the Earth's crust. The chemical
                                    composition of the gas phase of this model approximates the composition of
                                    the natural atmosphere.

                                    bJ. Szargut, D. R. Morris, and F. R. Steward, Exergy Analysis of Thermal,
                                    Chemical, and Metallurgical Processes, Hemisphere, New York, 1988. In Model
                                    II, p0  1.0 atm. In developing this model a reference substance is selected for
                                    each chemical element from among substances that contain the element being
                                    considered and that are abundantly present in the natural environment, even
                                    though the substances are not in completely mutual stable equilibrium. An
                                    underlying rationale for this approach is that substances found abundantly in
                                    nature have little economic value. On an overall basis, the chemical composition
                                    of the exergy reference environment of Model II is closer than Model I to the
                                    composition of the natural environment, but the equilibrium criterion is not
                                    always satisfied.
                                                                                                  Tables in SI Units 765

TABLE A-27 Logarithms to the Base 10 of the Equilibrium Constant K

                                                 log10 K

Temp.  H2 wx 2H  O2 wx 2O  N2 wx 2N  12O2  21N2   H2O wx              H2O wx              CO2 wx  CO2  H2 wx  Temp.
  K                                    wx NO     H2  21O2           OH  21H2            CO  21O2   CO  H2O      R
       71.224    81.208    159.600
  298  40.316    45.880     92.672   15.171      40.048              46.054              45.066      5.018      537
  500  17.292    19.614     43.056    8.783      22.886              26.130              25.025      2.139      900
1000   13.414    15.208     34.754    4.062      10.062              11.280              10.221      0.159    1800
1200   10.630    12.054     28.812    3.275                                                          0.135    2160
1400                                  2.712       7.899               8.811               7.764      0.333    2520
                                                  6.347               7.021               6.014
                                                                                                     0.474    2880
1600   8.532     9.684     24.350    2.290       5.180                           5.677    4.706      0.530    3060
1700   7.666     8.706     22.512    2.116       4.699                           5.124    4.169      0.577    3240
1800   6.896     7.836     20.874    1.962       4.270                           4.613    3.693      0.619    3420
1900   6.204     7.058     19.410    1.823       3.886                           4.190    3.267      0.656    3600
2000   5.580     6.356     18.092    1.699       3.540                           3.776    2.884
                                                                                                     0.688    3780
2100   5.016     5.720     16.898    1.586       3.227                           3.434    2.539      0.716    3960
2200   4.502     5.142     15.810    1.484       2.942                           3.091    2.226      0.742    4140
2300   4.032     4.614     14.818    1.391       2.682                           2.809    1.940      0.764    4320
2400   3.600     4.130     13.908    1.305       2.443                           2.520    1.679      0.784    4500
2500   3.202     3.684     13.070    1.227       2.224                           2.270    1.440
                                                                                                     0.802    4680
2600   2.836     3.272     12.298    1.154       2.021                           2.038    1.219      0.818    4860
2700   2.494     2.892     11.580    1.087       1.833                           1.823    1.015      0.833    5040
2800   2.178     2.536     10.914    1.025       1.658                           1.624    0.825      0.846    5220
2900   1.882     2.206     10.294    0.967       1.495                           1.438    0.649      0.858    5400
3000   1.606     1.898               0.913       1.343                           1.265    0.485
                            9.716                                                                    0.869    5580
                                                                                          0.332      0.878    5760
3100   1.348     1.610     9.174     0.863       1.201                           1.103    0.189      0.888    5940        Table A-27
3200   1.106     1.340     8.664     0.815       1.067                           0.951    0.054      0.895    6120
3300   0.878     1.086     8.186     0.771       0.942                           0.809    0.071      0.902    6300
3400   0.664     0.846     7.736     0.729       0.824                           0.674    0.190
3500   0.462     0.620     7.312     0.690       0.712                           0.547

Source: Based on data from the JANAF Thermochemical Tables, NSRDS-NBS-37, 1971.
Index to Tables in English Units

TABLE A-1E   Atomic or Molecular Weights and Critical Properties of Selected Elements and Compounds 767
TABLE A-2E
TABLE A-3E   Properties of Saturated Water (Liquid­Vapor): Temperature Table                    768
TABLE A-4E
TABLE A-5E   Properties of Saturated Water (Liquid­Vapor): Pressure Table                       770
TABLE A-6E
TABLE A-7E   Properties of Superheated Water Vapor                                              772
TABLE A-8E
TABLE A-9E   Properties of Compressed Liquid Water                                              778
TABLE A-10E
TABLE A-11E  Properties of Saturated Water (Solid­Vapor): Temperature Table                     779
TABLE A-12E
TABLE A-13E  Properties of Saturated Refrigerant 22 (Liquid­Vapor): Temperature Table           780
TABLE A-14E
TABLE A-15E  Properties of Saturated Refrigerant 22 (Liquid­Vapor): Pressure Table              781
TABLE A-16E
TABLE A-17E  Properties of Superheated Refrigerant 22 Vapor                                     782
TABLE A-18E
TABLE A-19E  Properties of Saturated Refrigerant 134a (Liquid­Vapor): Temperature Table         786
TABLE A-20E
TABLE A-21E  Properties of Saturated Refrigerant 134a (Liquid­Vapor): Pressure Table            787
TABLE A-22E
TABLE A-23E  Properties of Superheated Refrigerant 134a Vapor                                   788
TABLE A-24E
             Properties of Saturated Ammonia (Liquid­Vapor): Temperature Table                  791
TABLE A-25E
             Properties of Saturated Ammonia (Liquid­Vapor): Pressure Table                     792

             Properties of Superheated Ammonia Vapor                                            793

             Properties of Saturated Propane (Liquid­Vapor): Temperature Table                  797

             Properties of Saturated Propane (Liquid­Vapor): Pressure Table                     798

             Properties of Superheated Propane Vapor                                            799

             Properties of Selected Solids and Liquids: cp, r, and k                            803

             Ideal Gas Specific Heats of Some Common Gases                                      804

             Variation of cp with Temperature for Selected Ideal Gases                          805

             Ideal Gas Properties of Air                                                        806

             Ideal Gas Properties of Selected Gases                                             808

             Constants for the van der Waals, Redlich­Kwong, and Benedict­Webb­Rubin Equations

             of State                                                                           812

             Thermochemical Properties of Selected Substances at 537R and 1 atm.                813

766
                                                                                                              Tables in English Units 767

TABLE A-1E Atomic or Molecular Weights and Critical Properties of Some Selected Elements and                                               Table A-1E
Compounds

Substance         Chemical      M          Tc      pc                                              Zc    pcvc
                  Formula   (lb/lbmol)    (R)    (atm)                                                   RTc
Acetylene
Air (equivalent)  C2H2        26.04      556      62                                                   0.274
Ammonia           --          28.97      239      37.2                                                 0.284
                  NH3         17.03      730     111.3                                                 0.242
Argon
Benzene           Ar          39.94      272      47.97                                                0.290
Butane            C6H6        78.11     1013      48.7                                                 0.274
                  C4H10       58.12      765      37.5                                                 0.274
Carbon
Carbon dioxide    C           12.01        --     --                                                    --
Carbon monoxide   CO2         44.01      548      72.9                                                 0.276
                  CO          28.01      239      34.5                                                 0.294

Copper            Cu        63.54       --       --                                                     --
Ethane                                                                                                 0.285
Ethyl alcohol     C2H6      30.07       549      48.2                                                  0.249

                  C2H5OH    46.07       929      63.0                                                  0.270
                                                                                                       0.300
Ethylene          C2H4      28.05       510      50.5                                                  0.304
Helium            He         4.003         9.33   2.26
Hydrogen          H2         2.016                                                                     0.290
                                         59.8    12.8                                                  0.220
                                                                                                       0.291
Methane           CH4       16.04       344      45.8
Methyl alcohol    CH3OH                                                                                0.258
Nitrogen          N2        32.04       924      78.5                                                  0.290
                                                                                                       0.276
                            28.01       227      33.5
                                                                                                       0.276
Octane            C8H18     114.22      1025     24.6                                                  0.278
Oxygen            O2                                                                                   0.267
Propane           C3H8      32.00       278      49.8
                                                                                                       0.260
                            44.09       666      42.1                                                  0.268
                                                                                                       0.233
Propylene         C3H6      42.08       657      45.6

Refrigerant 12    CCl2F2    120.92      693      40.6

Refrigerant 22    CHClF2    86.48       665      49.1

Refrigerant 134a  CF3CH2F   102.03       673      40.2
Sulfur dioxide    SO2        64.06       775      77.7
Water             H2O        18.02      1165     218.0

Sources: Adapted from International Critical Tables and L. C. Nelson and E. F. Obert, Generalized
Compressibility Charts, Chem. Eng., 617: 203 (1954).
     768 Tables in English Units

     TABLE A-2E Properties of Saturated Water (Liquid­Vapor): Temperature Table

                      Specific Volume    Internal Energy          Enthalpy                Entropy
                            ft3/lb            Btu/lb               Btu/lb                Btu/lb # R

     Temp.  Press.     Sat.        Sat.   Sat.    Sat.     Sat.     Evap.         Sat.    Sat.      Sat.   Temp.
       F    lbf/in.2  Liquid      Vapor  Liquid  Vapor    Liquid     hfg         Vapor   Liquid    Vapor     F

        32  0.0886      vf          vg     uf      ug       hf     1075.4          hg       sf       sg       32
        35  0.0999                                                 1073.7                                     35
H2O     40  0.1217    0.01602     3305   .01     1021.2    .01     1070.9        1075.4  .00003    2.1870     40
        45  0.1475    0.01602     2948    2.99   1022.2     3.00   1068.1        1076.7   0.00607  2.1764     45
        50  0.1780    0.01602     2445    8.02   1023.9     8.02   1065.2        1078.9   0.01617  2.1592     50
                      0.01602     2037   13.04   1025.5    13.04                 1081.1   0.02618  2.1423
                      0.01602     1704   18.06   1027.2    18.06                 1083.3   0.03607  2.1259     52
                                                                                                              54
     52 0.1917 0.01603 1589              20.06   1027.8   20.07   1064.1         1084.2  0.04000   2.1195     56
     54 0.2064 0.01603 1482              22.07   1028.5   22.07   1063.0         1085.1  0.04391   2.1131     58
     56 0.2219 0.01603 1383              24.08   1029.1   24.08   1061.9         1085.9  0.04781   2.1068     60
     58 0.2386 0.01603 1292              26.08   1029.8   26.08   1060.7         1086.8  0.05159   2.1005
     60 0.2563 0.01604 1207              28.08   1030.4   28.08   1059.6         1087.7  0.05555   2.0943     62
                                                                                                              64
     62 0.2751 0.01604 1129              30.09 1031.1 30.09 1058.5               1088.6  0.05940   2.0882     66
                                                                                 1089.4  0.06323   2.0821     68
     64 0.2952 0.01604 1056              32.09 1031.8 32.09 1057.3               1090.3  0.06704   2.0761     70
                                                                                 1091.2  0.07084   2.0701
     66 0.3165 0.01604 988.4 34.09 1032.4 34.09 1056.2                           1092.0  0.07463   2.0642     72
                                                                                                              74
     68 0.3391 0.01605 925.8 36.09 1033.1 36.09 1055.1                           1092.9                       76
                                                                                 1093.8                       78
     70 0.3632 0.01605 867.7 38.09 1033.7 38.09 1054.0                           1094.7                       80
                                                                                 1095.5
     72 0.3887 0.01606 813.7 40.09 1034.4 40.09 1052.8                           1096.4  0.07839   2.0584     82
     74 0.4158 0.01606 763.5 42.09 1035.0 42.09 1051.7                                   0.08215   2.0526     84
     76 0.4446 0.01606 716.8 44.09 1035.7 44.09 1050.6                           1097.3  0.08589   2.0469     86
     78 0.4750 0.01607 673.3 46.09 1036.3 46.09 1049.4                           1098.1  0.08961   2.0412     88
     80 0.5073 0.01607 632.8 48.08 1037.0 48.09 1048.3                           1099.0  0.09332   2.0356     90
                                                                                 1099.9
     82 0.5414 0.01608 595.0 50.08 1037.6 50.08 1047.2                           1100.7  0.09701   2.0300     92
     84 0.5776 0.01608 559.8 52.08 1038.3 52.08 1046.0                                   0.1007    2.0245     94
     86 0.6158 0.01609 527.0 54.08 1038.9 54.08 1044.9                           1101.6  0.1044    2.0190     96
     88 0.6562 0.01609 496.3 56.07 1039.6 56.07 1043.8                           1102.4  0.1080    2.0136     98
     90 0.6988 0.01610 467.7 58.07 1040.2 58.07 1042.7                           1103.3  0.1117    2.0083   100
                                                                                 1104.2
      92 0.7439 0.01611 440.9 60.06 1040.9 60.06 1041.5                          1105.0  0.1153    2.0030   110
      94 0.7914 0.01611 415.9 62.06 1041.5 62.06 1040.4                                  0.1189    1.9977   120
      96 0.8416 0.01612 392.4 64.05 1041.2 64.06 1039.2                          1109.3  0.1225    1.9925   130
      98 0.8945 0.01612 370.5 66.05 1042.8 66.05 1038.1                          1113.5  0.1261    1.9874   140
     100 0.9503 0.01613 350.0 68.04 1043.5 68.05 1037.0                          1117.8  0.1296    1.9822   150
                                                                                 1121.9
     110 1.276 0.01617 265.1 78.02 1046.7 78.02 1031.3                           1126.1  0.1473    1.9574   160
     120 1.695 0.01621 203.0 87.99 1049.9 88.00 1025.5                                   0.1647    1.9336   170
     130 2.225 0.01625 157.2 97.97 1053.0 97.98 1019.8                           1130.1  0.1817    1.9109   180
     140 2.892 0.01629 122.9 107.95 1056.2 107.96 1014.0                         1134.2  0.1985    1.8892   190
     150 3.722 0.01634 97.0 117.95 1059.3 117.96 1008.1                          1138.2  0.2150    1.8684   200
                                                                                 1142.1
     160 4.745        0.01640     77.2 127.94 1062.3 127.96 1002.2               1145.9  0.2313    1.8484
     170 5.996        0.01645     62.0 137.95 1065.4 137.97 996.2                        0.2473    1.8293
     180 7.515        0.01651     50.2 147.97 1068.3 147.99 990.2                        0.2631    1.8109
     190 9.343        0.01657     41.0 158.00 1071.3 158.03 984.1                        0.2787    1.7932
     200 11.529       0.01663     33.6 168.04 1074.2 168.07 977.9                        0.2940    1.7762
                                                                            Tables in English Units 769

TABLE A-2E (Continued )

                 Specific Volume  Internal Energy          Enthalpy          Entropy
                       ft3/lb          Btu/lb               Btu/lb          Btu/lb # R

Temp.  Press.     Sat.     Sat.    Sat.    Sat.     Sat.    Evap.     Sat.   Sat.    Sat.  Temp.
  F    lbf/in.2  Liquid   Vapor   Liquid  Vapor    Liquid     hfg    Vapor  Liquid  Vapor    F

                   vf       vg      uf      ug       hf                hg      sf     sg

210    14.13 0.01670 27.82        178.1 1077.0 178.1 971.6 1149.7 0.3091 1.7599 210                                                         H2O

212    14.70 0.01672 26.80        180.1 1077.6 180.2 970.3 1150.5 0.3121 1.7567 212

220    17.19 0.01677 23.15        188.2 1079.8 188.2 965.3 1153.5 0.3241 1.7441 220

230    20.78 0.01685 19.39        198.3 1082.6 198.3 958.8 1157.1 0.3388 1.7289 230

240    24.97 0.01692 16.33        208.4 1085.3 208.4 952.3 1160.7 0.3534 1.7143 240

250    29.82 0.01700 13.83        218.5 1087.9 218.6 945.6 1164.2 0.3677 1.7001 250

260    35.42 0.01708 11.77        228.6 1090.5 228.8 938.8 1167.6 0.3819 1.6864 260

270    41.85 0.01717 10.07        238.8 1093.0 239.0 932.0 1170.9 0.3960 1.6731 270

280    49.18 0.01726 8.65         249.0 1095.4 249.2 924.9 1174.1 0.4099 1.6602 280

290    57.53 0.01735 7.47         259.3 1097.7 259.4 917.8 1177.2 0.4236 1.6477 290

300    66.98 0.01745 6.472        269.5 1100.0 269.7 910.4 1180.2 0.4372 1.6356 300

310    77.64 0.01755 5.632        279.8 1102.1 280.1 903.0 1183.0 0.4507 1.6238 310

320    89.60 0.01765 4.919        290.1 1104.2 290.4 895.3 1185.8 0.4640 1.6123 320

330    103.00 0.01776 4.312       300.5 1106.2 300.8 887.5 1188.4 0.4772 1.6010 330

340    117.93 0.01787 3.792       310.9 1108.0 311.3 879.5 1190.8 0.4903 1.5901 340

350    134.53 0.01799 3.346       321.4 1109.8 321.8 871.3 1193.1 0.5033 1.5793 350

360    152.92 0.01811 2.961       331.8 1111.4 332.4 862.9 1195.2 0.5162 1.5688 360

370    173.23 0.01823 2.628       342.4 1112.9 343.0 854.2 1197.2 0.5289 1.5585 370

380    195.60 0.01836 2.339       353.0 1114.3 353.6 845.4 1199.0 0.5416 1.5483 380

390    220.2 0.01850 2.087        363.6 1115.6 364.3 836.2 1200.6 0.5542 1.5383 390

400    247.1 0.01864 1.866        374.3 1116.6 375.1 826.8 1202.0 0.5667 1.5284 400

410    276.5 0.01878 1.673        385.0 1117.6 386.0 817.2 1203.1 0.5792 1.5187 410

420    308.5 0.01894 1.502        395.8 1118.3 396.9 807.2 1204.1 0.5915 1.5091 420

430    343.3 0.01909 1.352        406.7 1118.9 407.9 796.9 1204.8 0.6038 1.4995 430

440    381.2 0.01926 1.219        417.6 1119.3 419.0 786.3 1205.3 0.6161 1.4900 440

450    422.1 0.01943 1.1011 428.6 1119.5 430.2 775.4 1205.6 0.6282 1.4806 450

460    466.3 0.01961 0.9961 439.7 1119.6 441.4 764.1 1205.5 0.6404 1.4712 460

470    514.1 0.01980 0.9025 450.9 1119.4 452.8 752.4 1205.2 0.6525 1.4618 470

480    565.5 0.02000 0.8187 462.2 1118.9 464.3 740.3 1204.6 0.6646 1.4524 480

490    620.7 0.02021 0.7436 473.6 1118.3 475.9 727.8 1203.7 0.6767 1.4430 490

500    680.0 0.02043 0.6761 485.1 1117.4 487.7 714.8 1202.5 0.6888 1.4335 500

520    811.4 0.02091 0.5605 508.5 1114.8 511.7 687.3 1198.9 0.7130 1.4145 520

540    961.5 0.02145 0.4658 532.6 1111.0 536.4 657.5 1193.8 0.7374 1.3950 540

560    1131.8 0.02207 0.3877 548.4 1105.8 562.0 625.0 1187.0 0.7620 1.3749 560

580    1324.3 0.02278 0.3225 583.1 1098.9 588.6 589.3 1178.0 0.7872 1.3540 580

600    1541.0 0.02363 0.2677 609.9 1090.0 616.7 549.7 1166.4 0.8130 1.3317 600

620    1784.4 0.02465 0.2209 638.3 1078.5 646.4 505.0 1151.4 0.8398 1.3075 620

640    2057.1 0.02593 0.1805 668.7 1063.2 678.6 453.4 1131.9 0.8681 1.2803 640

660    2362      0.02767 0.1446 702.3 1042.3 714.4 391.1 1105.5 0.8990 1.2483 660

680    2705      0.03032 0.1113 741.7 1011.0 756.9 309.8 1066.7 0.9350 1.2068 680

700    3090      0.03666  0.0744 801.7    947.7    822.7   167.5     990.2 0.9902 1.1346 700
                 0.05053  0.05053 872.6   872.6    902.5      0      902.5 1.0580 1.0580 705.4
705.4 3204

Source: Tables A-2E through A-6E are extracted from J. H. Keenan, F. G. Keyes, P. G. Hill, and J. G. Moore, Steam Tables, Wiley, New York,
1969.
     770 Tables in English Units

     TABLE A-3E Properties of Saturated Water (Liquid­Vapor): Pressure Table

                       Specific Volume   Internal Energy          Enthalpy                     Entropy
                             ft3/lb           Btu/lb               Btu/lb                     Btu/lb # R

     Press.    Temp.    Sat.       Sat.   Sat.    Sat.     Sat.   Evap.        Sat.    Sat.   Evap.        Sat.   Press.
     lbf/in.2    F     Liquid     Vapor  Liquid  Vapor    Liquid   hfg        Vapor   Liquid    sfg       Vapor   lbf/in.2

                         vf         vg     uf      ug       hf                  hg       sf                 sg       0.4
                                                                                                                     0.6
H2O  0.4       72.84 0.01606 792.0       40.94   1034.7   40.94   1052.3      1093.3  0.0800  1.9760      2.0559     0.8
                                         53.26   1038.7   53.27   1045.4      1098.6  0.1029  1.9184      2.0213     1.0
     0.6       85.19 0.01609 540.0       62.41   1041.7   62.41   1040.2      1102.6  0.1195  1.8773      1.9968     1.2
                                         69.74   1044.0   69.74   1036.0      1105.8  0.1327  1.8453      1.9779
     0.8       94.35 0.01611 411.7       75.90   1046.0   75.90   1032.5      1108.4  0.1436  1.8190      1.9626     1.5
                                                                                                                     2.0
     1.0 101.70 0.01614 333.6                                                                                        3.0
                                                                                                                     4.0
     1.2 107.88 0.01616 280.9                                                                                        5.0

     1.5 115.65 0.01619 227.7            83.65 1048.5 83.65 1028.0 1111.7 0.1571 1.7867 1.9438                       6.0
                                                                                                                     7.0
     2.0 126.04 0.01623 173.75           94.02 1051.8 94.02 1022.1 1116.1 0.1750 1.7448 1.9198                       8.0
                                                                                                                     9.0
     3.0 141.43 0.01630 118.72 109.38 1056.6 109.39 1013.1 1122.5 0.2009 1.6852 1.8861                             10

     4.0 152.93 0.01636 90.64 120.88 1060.2 120.89 1006.4 1127.3 0.2198 1.6426 1.8624                              14.696
                                                                                                                   15
     5.0 162.21 0.01641 73.53 130.15 1063.0 130.17 1000.9 1131.0 0.2349 1.6093 1.8441                              20
                                                                                                                   25
     6.0 170.03 0.01645 61.98 137.98 1065.4 138.00 996.2 1134.2 0.2474 1.5819 1.8292                               30

     7.0 176.82 0.01649 53.65 144.78 1067.4 144.80 992.1 1136.9 0.2581 1.5585 1.8167                               35
                                                                                                                   40
     8.0 182.84 0.01653 47.35 150.81 1069.2 150.84 988.4 1139.3 0.2675 1.5383 1.8058                               45
                                                                                                                   50
     9.0 188.26 0.01656 42.41 156.25 1070.8 156.27 985.1 1141.4 0.2760 1.5203 1.7963                               55

     10        193.19 0.01659 38.42 161.20 1072.2 161.23 982.1 1143.3 0.2836 1.5041 1.7877                         60
                                                                                                                   65
     14.696    211.99  0.01672    26.80  180.10  1077.6   180.15  970.4       1150.5  0.3121  1.4446      1.7567   70
     15        213.03  0.01672    26.29  181.14  1077.9   181.19  969.7       1150.9  0.3137  1.4414      1.7551   75
     20        227.96  0.01683    20.09  196.19  1082.0   196.26  960.1       1156.4  0.3358  1.3962      1.7320   80
     25        240.08  0.01692    16.31  208.44  1085.3   208.52  952.2       1160.7  0.3535  1.3607      1.7142
     30        250.34  0.01700    13.75  218.84  1088.0   218.93  945.4       1164.3  0.3682  1.3314      1.6996   85
                                                                                                                   90
     35        259.30 0.01708 11.90 227.93 1090.3 228.04 939.3 1167.4 0.3809 1.3064 1.6873                         95
                                                                                                                  100
     40        267.26 0.01715 10.50 236.03 1092.3 236.16 933.8 1170.0 0.3921 1.2845 1.6767                        110

     45        274.46 0.01721 9.40 243.37 1094.0 243.51 928.8 1172.3 0.4022 1.2651 1.6673                         120
                                                                                                                  130
     50        281.03 0.01727 8.52 250.08 1095.6 250.24 924.2 1174.4 0.4113 1.2476 1.6589                         140
                                                                                                                  150
     55        287.10 0.01733 7.79 256.28 1097.0 256.46 919.9 1176.3 0.4196 1.2317 1.6513                         160

     60        292.73 0.01738 7.177 262.1 1098.3 262.2 915.8 1178.0 0.4273 1.2170 1.6443

     65        298.00 0.01743 6.647 267.5 1099.5 267.7 911.9 1179.6 0.4345 1.2035 1.6380

     70        302.96 0.01748 6.209 272.6 1100.6 272.8 908.3 1181.0 0.4412 1.1909 1.6321

     75        307.63 0.01752 5.818 277.4 1101.6 277.6 904.8 1182.4 0.4475 1.1790 1.6265

     80        312.07 0.01757 5.474 282.0 1102.6 282.2 901.4 1183.6 0.4534 1.1679 1.6213

     85        316.29 0.01761 5.170 286.3 1103.5 286.6 898.2 1184.8 0.4591 1.1574 1.6165

     90        320.31 0.01766 4.898 290.5 1104.3 290.8 895.1 1185.9 0.4644 1.1475 1.6119

     95        324.16 0.01770 4.654 294.5 1105.0 294.8 892.1 1186.9 0.4695 1.1380 1.6075

     100       327.86 0.01774 4.434 298.3 1105.8 298.6 889.2 1187.8 0.4744 1.1290 1.6034

     110       334.82 0.01781 4.051 305.5 1107.1 305.9 883.7 1189.6 0.4836 1.1122 1.5958

     120       341.30 0.01789 3.730 312.3 1108.3 312.7 878.5 1191.1 0.4920 1.0966 1.5886

     130       347.37 0.01796 3.457 318.6 1109.4 319.0 873.5 1192.5 0.4999 1.0822 1.5821

     140       353.08 0.01802 3.221 324.6 1110.3 325.1 868.7 1193.8 0.5073 1.0688 1.5761

     150       358.48 0.01809 3.016 330.2 1111.2 330.8 864.2 1194.9 0.5142 1.0562 1.5704

     160       363.60 0.01815 2.836 335.6 1112.0 336.2 859.8 1196.0 0.5208 1.0443 1.5651
                                                                                      Tables in English Units 771

TABLE A-3E (Continued )

                  Specific Volume  Internal Energy          Enthalpy                   Entropy
                        ft3/lb          Btu/lb               Btu/lb                   Btu/ lb # R

Press. Temp.       Sat.     Sat.    Sat.    Sat.     Sat.   Evap.      Sat.    Sat.   Evap.         Sat.   Press.
                  Liquid   Vapor   Liquid  Vapor    Liquid   hfg      Vapor   Liquid    sfg        Vapor   lbf/in.2
lbf/in.2  F
                    vf       vg      uf      ug       hf                hg       sf                  sg     170
                                                                                                            180
170 368.47 0.01821 2.676           340.8   1112.7   341.3   855.6     1196.9  0.5270  1.0330       1.5600   190      H2O
180 373.13 0.01827 2.553           345.7   1113.4   346.3   851.5     1197.8  0.5329  1.0223       1.5552   200
190 377.59 0.01833 2.405           350.4   1114.0   351.0   847.5     1198.6  0.5386  1.0122       1.5508   250
200 381.86 0.01839 2.289           354.9   1114.6   355.6   843.7     1199.3  0.5440  1.0025       1.5465
250 401.04 0.01865 1.845           375.4   1116.7   376.2   825.8     1202.1  0.5680  0.9594       1.5274   300
                                                                                                            350
300 417.43 0.01890 1.544           393.0   1118.2   394.1   809.8     1203.9  0.5883  0.9232       1.5115   400
350 431.82 0.01912 1.327           408.7   1119.0   409.9   795.0     1204.9  0.6060  0.8917       1.4977   450
400 444.70 0.01934 1.162           422.8   1119.5   424.2   781.2     1205.5  0.6218  0.8638       1.4856   500
450 456.39 0.01955 1.033           435.7   1119.6   437.4   768.2     1205.6  0.6360  0.8385       1.4745
500 467.13 0.01975 0.928           447.7   1119.4   449.5   755.8     1205.3  0.6490  0.8154       1.4644   550
                                                                                                            600
550 477.07 0.01994 0.842           458.9   1119.1   460.9   743.9     1204.8  0.6611  0.7941       1.4451   700
600 486.33 0.02013 0.770           469.4   1118.6   471.7   732.4     1204.1  0.6723  0.7742       1.4464   800
700 503.23 0.02051 0.656           488.9   1117.0   491.5   710.5     1202.0  0.6927  0.7378       1.4305   900
800 518.36 0.02087 0.569           506.6   1115.0   509.7   689.6     1199.3  0.7110  0.7050       1.4160
900 532.12 0.02123 0.501           523.0   1112.6   526.6   669.5     1196.0  0.7277  0.6750       1.4027  1000
                                                                                                           1100
1000      544.75  0.02159  0.446   538.4   1109.9   542.4   650.0     1192.4  0.7432  0.6471       1.3903  1200
1100      556.45  0.02195  0.401   552.9   1106.8   557.4   631.0     1188.3  0.7576  0.6209       1.3786  1300
1200      567.37  0.02232  0.362   566.7   1103.5   571.7   612.3     1183.9  0.7712  0.5961       1.3673  1400
1300      577.60  0.02269  0.330   579.9   1099.8   585.4   593.8     1179.2  0.7841  0.5724       1.3565
1400      587.25  0.02307  0.302   592.7   1096.0   598.6   575.5     1174.1  0.7964  0.5497       1.3461  1500
                                                                                                           1600
1500      596.39  0.02346  0.277   605.0   1091.8   611.5   557.2     1168.7  0.8082  0.5276       1.3359  1700
1600      605.06  0.02386  0.255   616.9   1087.4   624.0   538.9     1162.9  0.8196  0.5062       1.3258  1800
1700      613.32  0.02428  0.236   628.6   1082.7   636.2   520.6     1156.9  0.8307  0.4852       1.3159  1900
1800      621.21  0.02472  0.218   640.0   1077.7   648.3   502.1     1150.4  0.8414  0.4645       1.3060
1900      628.76  0.02517  0.203   651.3   1072.3   660.1   483.4     1143.5  0.8519  0.4441       1.2961  2000
                                                                                                           2250
2000      636.00  0.02565  0.188   662.4   1066.6   671.9   464.4     1136.3  0.8623  0.4238       1.2861  2500
2250      652.90  0.02698  0.157   689.9   1050.6   701.1   414.8     1115.9  0.8876  0.3728       1.2604  2750
2500      668.31  0.02860  0.131   717.7   1031.0   730.9   360.5     1091.4  0.9131  0.3196       1.2327  3000
2750      682.46  0.03077  0.107   747.3   1005.9   763.0   297.4     1060.4  0.9401  0.2604       1.2005
3000      695.52  0.03431  0.084   783.4    968.8   802.5   213.0     1015.5  0.9732  0.1843       1.1575  3203.6

3203.6 705.44 0.05053 0.0505       872.6 872.6      902.5   0         902.5   1.0580 0             1.0580
     772 Tables in English Units

     TABLE A-4E Properties of Superheated Water Vapor

                                  T  v        u  h               s         v     u  h                s
                                                                         ft3/lb
                                  F ft3/lb    Btu/lb Btu/lb Btu/lb # R           Btu/lb Btu/lb Btu/lb # R
                                                                         73.53
                                               p  1 lbf/in.2                      p  5 lbf/in.2
                                              (Tsat  101.7F)                     (Tsat  162.2F)

H2O                               Sat. 333.6  1044.0 1105.8      1.9779          1063.0 1131.0 1.8441
                                  150 362.6   1060.4 1127.5      2.0151
                                  200 392.5   1077.5 1150.1      2.0508   78.15 1076.0 1148.6        1.8715

                                  250 422.4   1094.7 1172.8      2.0839   84.21 1093.8 1171.7        1.9052
                                  300 452.3   1112.0 1195.7      2.1150   90.24 1111.3 1194.8        1.9367
                                  400 511.9   1147.0 1241.8      2.1720  102.24 1146.6 1241.2        1.9941

                                  500 571.5   1182.8 1288.5      2.2235  114.20 1182.5 1288.2        2.0458
                                  600 631.1   1219.3 1336.1      2.2706  126.15 1219.1 1335.8        2.0930
                                  700 690.7   1256.7 1384.5      2.3142  138.08 1256.5 1384.3        2.1367

      800 750.3                               1294.4 1433.7      2.3550  150.01 1294.7 1433.5        2.1775
      900 809.9                               1333.9 1483.8      2.3932  161.94 1333.8 1483.7        2.2158
     1000 869.5                               1373.9 1534.8      2.4294  173.86 1373.9 1534.7        2.2520

      Sat.                           38.42       p  10 lbf/in.2  1.7877  26.80     p  14.7 lbf/in.2  1.7567
      200                            38.85      (Tsat  193.2F)   1.7927            (Tsat  212.0F)
      250                            41.95                       1.8272
                                              1072.2 1143.3                      1077.6 1150.5
      300                            44.99    1074.7 1146.6      1.8592
      400                            51.03    1092.6 1170.2      1.9171  28.42 1091.5 1168.8         1.7832
      500                            57.04                       1.9690
                                              1110.4 1193.7              30.52 1109.6 1192.6         1.8157
      600                            63.03    1146.1 1240.5      2.0164  34.67 1145.6 1239.9         1.8741
      700                            69.01    1182.2 1287.7      2.0601  38.77 1181.8 1287.3         1.9263
      800                            74.98                       2.1009
                                              1218.9 1335.5              42.86 1218.6 1335.2         1.9737
      900                            80.95    1256.3 1384.0      2.1393  46.93 1256.1 1383.8         2.0175
     1000                            86.91    1294.6 1433.3      2.1755  51.00 1294.4 1433.1         2.0584
     1100                            92.88                       2.2099
                                              1333.7 1483.5              55.07 1333.6 1483.4         2.0967
                                              1373.8 1534.6              59.13 1373.7 1534.5         2.1330
                                              1414.7 1586.6              63.19 1414.6 1586.4         2.1674

      Sat.                           20.09       p  20 lbf/in.2  1.7320  10.50      p  40 lbf/in.2   1.6767
      250                            20.79      (Tsat  228.0F)   1.7475            (Tsat  267.3F)
      300                            22.36                       1.7805
                                              1082.0 1156.4                      1093.3 1170.0
      350                            23.90    1090.3 1167.2      1.8110
      400                            25.43    1108.7 1191.5      1.8395  11.04 1105.1 1186.8         1.6993
      500                            28.46                       1.8919
                                              1126.9 1215.4              11.84 1124.2 1211.8         1.7312
      600                            31.47    1145.1 1239.2      1.9395  12.62 1143.0 1236.4         1.7606
      700                            34.47    1181.5 1286.8      1.9834  14.16 1180.1 1284.9         1.8140
      800                            37.46                       2.0243
                                              1218.4 1334.8              15.69 1217.3 1333.4         1.8621
      900                            40.45    1255.9 1383.5      2.0627  17.20 1255.1 1382.4         1.9063
     1000                            43.44    1294.3 1432.9      2.0989  18.70 1293.7 1432.1         1.9474
     1100                            46.42                       2.1334
                                              1333.5 1483.2              20.20 1333.0 1482.5         1.9859
                                              1373.5 1534.3              21.70 1373.1 1533.8         2.0223
                                              1414.5 1586.3              23.20 1414.2 1585.9         2.0568
                                                                            Tables in English Units 773

TABLE A-4E (Continued)

T      v      u         h        s         v     u  h               s
                                         ft3/lb
F ft3/lb Btu/lb Btu/lb Btu/lb # R                Btu/lb Btu/lb Btu/lb # R
                                         5.47
              p  60 lbf/in.2                     p  80 lbf/in.2
              (Tsat  292.7F)                     (Tsat  312.1F)

Sat. 7.17 1098.3 1178.0 1.6444                   1102.6 1183.6 1.6214                                    H2O
300 7.26 1101.3 1181.9 1.6496
350 7.82 1121.4 1208.2 1.6830             5.80   1118.5 1204.3      1.6476

400 8.35      1140.8 1233.5      1.7134   6.22   1138.5 1230.6      1.6790
500 9.40      1178.6 1283.0      1.7678   7.02   1177.2 1281.1      1.7346
600 10.43     1216.3 1332.1      1.8165   7.79   1215.3 1330.7      1.7838

700 11.44     1254.4 1381.4      1.8609   8.56   1253.6 1380.3      1.8285
800 12.45     1293.0 1431.2      1.9022   9.32   1292.4 1430.4      1.8700
900 13.45     1332.5 1481.8      1.9408  10.08   1332.0 1481.2      1.9087

1000   14.45  1372.7 1533.2      1.9773  10.83   1372.3 1532.6      1.9453
1100   15.45  1413.8 1585.4      2.0119  11.58   1413.5 1584.9      1.9799
1200   16.45  1455.8 1638.5      2.0448  12.33   1455.5 1638.1      2.0130

 Sat.  4.434    p  100 lbf/in.2  1.6034  3.730     p  120 lbf/in.2  1.5886
 350   4.592    (Tsat  327.8F)   1.6191  3.783     (Tsat  341.3F)   1.5950
 400   4.934                     1.6517  4.079                      1.6288
              1105.8 1187.8                      1108.3 1191.1
 450   5.265  1115.4 1200.4      1.6812  4.360   1112.2 1196.2      1.6590
 500   5.587  1136.2 1227.5      1.7085  4.633   1133.8 1224.4      1.6868
 600   6.216                     1.7582  5.164                      1.7371
              1156.2 1253.6                      1154.3 1251.2
 700   6.834  1175.7 1279.1      1.8033  5.682   1174.2 1277.1      1.7825
 800   7.445  1214.2 1329.3      1.8449  6.195   1213.2 1327.8      1.8243
 900   8.053                     1.8838  6.703                      1.8633
              1252.8 1379.2                      1252.0 1378.2
1000   8.657  1291.8 1429.6      1.9204  7.208   1291.2 1428.7      1.9000
1100   9.260  1331.5 1480.5      1.9551  7.711   1330.9 1479.8      1.9348
1200   9.861                     1.9882  8.213                      1.9679
              1371.9 1532.1                      1371.5 1531.5
              1413.1 1584.5                      1412.8 1584.0
              1455.2 1637.7                      1454.9 1637.3

 Sat.  3.221    p  140 lbf/in.2  1.5761  2.836     p  160 lbf/in.2  1.5651
 400   3.466    (Tsat  353.1F)   1.6088  3.007     (Tsat  363.6F)   1.5911
 450   3.713                     1.6399  3.228                      1.6230
              1110.3 1193.8                      1112.0 1196.0
 500   3.952  1131.4 1221.2      1.6682  3.440   1128.8 1217.8      1.6518
 550   4.184  1152.4 1248.6      1.6945  3.646   1150.5 1246.1      1.6785
 600   4.412                     1.7191  3.848                      1.7034
              1172.7 1275.1                      1171.2 1273.0
 700   4.860  1192.5 1300.9      1.7648  4.243   1191.3 1299.2      1.7494
 800   5.301  1212.1 1326.4      1.8068  4.631   1211.1 1325.0      1.7916
 900   5.739                     1.8459  5.015                      1.8308
              1251.2 1377.1                      1250.4 1376.0
1000   6.173  1290.5 1427.9      1.8827  5.397   1289.9 1427.0      1.8677
1100   6.605  1330.4 1479.1      1.9176  5.776   1329.9 1478.4      1.9026
1200   7.036                     1.9507  6.154                      1.9358
              1371.0 1531.0                      1370.6 1530.4
              1412.4 1583.6                      1412.1 1583.1
              1454.6 1636.9                      1454.3 1636.5
     774 Tables in English Units

     TABLE A-4E (Continued )

                                  T  v  u  h                s          v     u  h                s
                                                                     ft3/lb
                                  F ft3/lb Btu/lb Btu/lb Btu/lb # R          Btu/lb Btu/lb Btu/lb # R
                                                                     2.289
                                        p  180 lbf/in.2              2.361   p  200 lbf/in.2
                                        (Tsat  373.1F)               2.548   (Tsat  381.8F)

H2O                               Sat. 2.533 1113.4 1197.8  1.5553           1114.6 1199.3       1.5464
                                  400 2.648 1126.2 1214.4   1.5749           1123.5 1210.8       1.5600
                                  450 2.850 1148.5 1243.4   1.6078           1146.4 1240.7       1.5938

                                  500 3.042 1169.6 1270.9   1.6372   2.724 1168.0 1268.8         1.6239
                                  550 3.228 1190.0 1297.5   1.6642   2.893 1188.7 1295.7         1.6512
                                  600 3.409 1210.0 1323.5   1.6893   3.058 1208.9 1322.1         1.6767

                                  700 3.763 1249.6 1374.9   1.7357   3.379 1248.8 1373.8         1.7234
                                  800 4.110 1289.3 1426.2   1.7781   3.693 1288.6 1425.3         1.7660
                                  900 4.453 1329.4 1477.7   1.8174   4.003 1328.9 1477.1         1.8055

     1000 4.793 1370.2 1529.8                               1.8545   4.310 1369.8 1529.3         1.8425
     1100 5.131 1411.7 1582.6                               1.8894   4.615 1411.4 1582.2         1.8776
     1200 5.467 1454.0 1636.1                               1.9227   4.918 1453.7 1635.7         1.9109

                                        p  250 lbf/in.2                         p  300 lbf/in.2
                                        (Tsat  401.0F)                          (Tsat  417.4F)

                                  Sat. 1.845 1116.7 1202.1  1.5274   1.544   1118.2 1203.9       1.5115
                                  450 2.002 1141.1 1233.7   1.5632   1.636   1135.4 1226.2       1.5365
                                  500 2.150 1163.8 1263.3   1.5948   1.766   1159.5 1257.5       1.5701

                                  550 2.290 1185.3 1291.3   1.6233   1.888 1181.9 1286.7         1.5997
                                  600 2.426 1206.1 1318.3   1.6494   2.004 1203.2 1314.5         1.6266
                                  700 2.688 1246.7 1371.1   1.6970   2.227 1244.0 1368.3         1.6751

      800 2.943 1287.0 1423.2                               1.7301   2.442 1285.4 1421.0         1.7187
      900 3.193 1327.6 1475.3                               1.7799   2.653 1326.3 1473.6         1.7589
     1000 3.440 1368.7 1527.9                               1.8172   2.860 1367.7 1526.5         1.7964

     1100 3.685 1410.5 1581.0                               1.8524   3.066 1409.6 1579.8         1.8317
     1200 3.929 1453.0 1634.8                               1.8858   3.270 1452.2 1633.8         1.8653
     1300 4.172 1496.3 1689.3                               1.9177   3.473 1495.6 1688.4         1.8973

                                        p  350 lbf/in.2                         p  400 lbf/in.2
                                        (Tsat  431.8F)                          (Tsat  444.7F)

                                  Sat. 1.327 1119.0 1204.9  1.4978   1.162   1119.5 1205.5       1.4856
                                  450 1.373 1129.2 1218.2   1.5125   1.175   1122.6 1209.5       1.4901
                                  500 1.491 1154.9 1251.5   1.5482   1.284   1150.1 1245.2       1.5282

                                  550 1.600 1178.3 1281.9   1.5790   1.383 1174.6 1277.0         1.5605
                                  600 1.703 1200.3 1310.6   1.6068   1.476 1197.3 1306.6         1.5892
                                  700 1.898 1242.5 1365.4   1.6562   1.650 1240.4 1362.5         1.6397

      800 2.085 1283.8 1418.8                               1.7004   1.816 1282.1 1416.6         1.6844
      900 2.267 1325.0 1471.8                               1.7409   1.978 1323.7 1470.1         1.7252
     1000 2.446 1366.6 1525.0                               1.7787   2.136 1365.5 1523.6         1.7632

     1100 2.624 1408.7 1578.6                               1.8142   2.292 1407.8 1577.4         1.7989
     1200 2.799 1451.5 1632.8                               1.8478   2.446 1450.7 1621.8         1.8327
     1300 2.974 1495.0 1687.6                               1.8799   2.599 1494.3 1686.8         1.8648
                                                                       Tables in English Units 775

TABLE A-4E (Continued)

T  v  u                 h  s         v     u  h                s
                                   ft3/lb
F ft3/lb Btu/lb Btu/lb Btu/lb # R          Btu/lb Btu/lb Btu/lb # R
                                   0.928
      p  450 lbf/in.2              0.992   p  500 lbf/in.2
      (Tsat  456.4F)               1.079   (Tsat  467.1F)

Sat. 1.033 1119.6 1205.6   1.4746          1119.4 1205.3       1.4645                               H2O
500 1.123 1145.1 1238.5    1.5097          1139.7 1231.5       1.4923
550 1.215 1170.7 1271.9    1.5436          1166.7 1266.6       1.5279

600 1.300 1194.3 1302.5    1.5732  1.158 1191.1 1298.3         1.5585
700 1.458 1238.2 1359.6    1.6248  1.304 1236.0 1356.7         1.6112
800 1.608 1280.5 1414.4    1.6701  1.441 1278.8 1412.1         1.6571

 900 1.752 1322.4 1468.3   1.7113  1.572 1321.0 1466.5         1.6987
1000 1.894 1364.4 1522.2   1.7495  1.701 1363.3 1520.7         1.7371
1100 2.034 1406.9 1576.3   1.7853  1.827 1406.0 1575.1         1.7731

1200 2.172 1450.0 1630.8   1.8192  1.952 1449.2 1629.8         1.8072
1300 2.308 1493.7 1685.9   1.8515  2.075 1493.1 1685.1         1.8395
1400 2.444 1538.1 1741.7   1.8823  2.198 1537.6 1741.0         1.8704

      p  600 lbf/in.2                         p  700 lbf/in.2
      (Tsat  486.3F)                          (Tsat  503.2F)

Sat. 0.770 1118.6 1204.1   1.4464  0.656   1117.0 1202.0       1.4305
500 0.795 1128.0 1216.2    1.4592
550 0.875 1158.2 1255.4    1.4990  0.728 1149.0 1243.2         1.4723

600 0.946 1184.5 1289.5    1.5320  0.793 1177.5 1280.2         1.5081
700 1.073 1231.5 1350.6    1.5872  0.907 1226.9 1344.4         1.5661
800 1.190 1275.4 1407.6    1.6343  1.011 1272.0 1402.9         1.6145

 900 1.302 1318.4 1462.9   1.6766  1.109 1315.6 1459.3         1.6576
1000 1.411 1361.2 1517.8   1.7155  1.204 1358.9 1514.9         1.6970
1100 1.517 1404.2 1572.7   1.7519  1.296 1402.4 1570.2         1.7337

1200 1.622 1447.7 1627.8   1.7861  1.387 1446.2 1625.8         1.7682
1300 1.726 1491.7 1683.4   1.8186  1.476 1490.4 1681.7         1.8009
1400 1.829 1536.5 1739.5   1.8497  1.565 1535.3 1738.1         1.8321

      p  800 lbf/in.2                         p  900 lbf/in.2
      (Tsat  518.3F)                          (Tsat  532.1F)

Sat. 0.569 1115.0 1199.3   1.4160  0.501   1112.6 1196.0       1.4027
550 0.615 1138.8 1229.9    1.4469  0.527   1127.5 1215.2       1.4219
600 0.677 1170.1 1270.4    1.4861  0.587   1162.2 1260.0       1.4652

650 0.732 1197.2 1305.6    1.5186  0.639 1191.1 1297.5         1.4999
700 0.783 1222.1 1338.0    1.5471  0.686 1217.1 1331.4         1.5297
800 0.876 1268.5 1398.2    1.5969  0.772 1264.9 1393.4         1.5810

 900 0.964 1312.9 1455.6   1.6408  0.851 1310.1 1451.9         1.6257
1000 1.048 1356.7 1511.9   1.6807  0.927 1354.5 1508.9         1.6662
1100 1.130 1400.5 1567.8   1.7178  1.001 1398.7 1565.4         1.7036

1200 1.210 1444.6 1623.8   1.7526  1.073 1443.0 1621.7         1.7386
1300 1.289 1489.1 1680.0   1.7854  1.144 1487.8 1687.3         1.7717
1400 1.367 1534.2 1736.6   1.8167  1.214 1533.0 1735.1         1.8031
     776 Tables in English Units

     TABLE A-4E (Continued )

                                  T  v  u  h                s          v      u  h              s
                                                                     ft3/ lb
                                  F ft3/lb Btu/lb Btu/lb Btu/lb # R           Btu/lb Btu/lb Btu/lb # R
                                                                     0.362
                                        p  1000 lbf/in.2             0.402    p  1200 lbf/in.2
                                        (Tsat  544.7F)               0.450    (Tsat  567.4F)

H2O                               Sat. 0.446 1109.0 1192.4  1.3903            1103.5 1183.9     1.3673
                                  600 0.514 1153.7 1248.8   1.4450            1134.4 1223.6     1.4054
                                  650 0.564 1184.7 1289.1   1.4822            1170.9 1270.8     1.4490

                                  700 0.608 1212.0 1324.6   1.5135   0.491 1201.3 1310.2        1.4837
                                  800 0.688 1261.2 1388.5   1.5665   0.562 1253.7 1378.4        1.5402
                                  900 0.761 1307.3 1448.1   1.6120   0.626 1301.5 1440.4        1.5876

     1000 0.831 1352.2 1505.9                               1.6530   0.685 1347.5 1499.7        1.6297
     1100 0.898 1396.8 1562.9                               1.6908   0.743 1393.0 1557.9        1.6682
     1200 0.963 1441.5 1619.7                               1.7261   0.798 1438.3 1615.5        1.7040

     1300 1.027 1486.5 1676.5                               1.7593   0.853 1483.8 1673.1        1.7377
     1400 1.091 1531.9 1733.7                               1.7909   0.906 1529.6 1730.7        1.7696
     1600 1.215 1624.4 1849.3                               1.8499   1.011 1622.6 1847.1        1.8290

                                        p  1400 lbf/in.2                         p  1600 lbf/in.2
                                        (Tsat  587.2F)                           (Tsat  605.1F)

                                  Sat. 0.302 1096.0 1174.1  1.3461   0.255    1087.4 1162.9 1.3258
                                  600 0.318 1110.9 1193.1   1.3641
                                  650 0.367 1155.5 1250.5   1.4171   0.303 1137.8 1227.4        1.3852

                                  700 0.406 1189.6 1294.8   1.4562   0.342 1177.0 1278.1        1.4299
                                  800 0.471 1245.8 1367.9   1.5168   0.403 1237.7 1357.0        1.4953
                                  900 0.529 1295.6 1432.5   1.5661   0.466 1289.5 1424.4        1.5468

     1000 0.582 1342.8 1493.5                               1.6094   0.504 1338.0 1487.1        1.5913
     1100 0.632 1389.1 1552.8                               1.6487   0.549 1385.2 1547.7        1.6315
     1200 0.681 1435.1 1611.4                               1.6851   0.592 1431.8 1607.1        1.6684

     1300 0.728 1481.1 1669.6                               1.7192   0.634 1478.3 1666.1        1.7029
     1400 0.774 1527.2 1727.8                               1.7513   0.675 1524.9 1724.8        1.7354
     1600 0.865 1620.8 1844.8                               1.8111   0.755 1619.0 1842.6        1.7955

                                        p  1800 lbf/in.2                      p  2000 lbf/in.2
                                        (Tsat  621.2F)                        (Tsat  636.0F)

                                  Sat. 0.218 1077.7 1150.4  1.3060   0.188    1066.6 1136.3     1.2861
                                  650 0.251 1117.0 1200.4   1.3517   0.206    1091.1 1167.2     1.3141
                                  700 0.291 1163.1 1259.9   1.4042   0.249    1147.7 1239.8     1.3782

                                  750 0.322 1198.6 1305.9   1.4430   0.280 1187.3 1291.1        1.4216
                                  800 0.350 1229.1 1345.7   1.4753   0.307 1220.1 1333.8        1.4562
                                  900 0.399 1283.2 1416.1   1.5291   0.353 1276.8 1407.6        1.5126

     1000 0.443 1333.1 1480.7                               1.5749   0.395 1328.1 1474.1        1.5598
     1100 0.484 1381.2 1542.5                               1.6159   0.433 1377.2 1537.2        1.6017
     1200 0.524 1428.5 1602.9                               1.6534   0.469 1425.2 1598.6        1.6398

     1300 0.561 1475.5 1662.5                               1.6883   0.503 1472.7 1659.0        1.6751
     1400 0.598 1522.5 1721.8                               1.7211   0.537 1520.2 1718.8        1.7082
     1600 0.670 1617.2 1840.4                               1.7817   0.602 1615.4 1838.2        1.7692
                                                                          Tables in English Units 777

TABLE A-4E (Continued)

T  v        u           h      s          v     u      h          s
                                        ft3/lb
F ft3/lb Btu/lb Btu/lb Btu/lb # R               Btu/lb Btu/lb Btu/lb # R
                                       0.0840
            p  2500 lbf/in.2           0.0977   p  3000 lbf/in.2
            (Tsat  668.3F)             0.1483   (Tsat  695.5F)

Sat. 0.1306 1031.0 1091.4      1.2327            968.8 1015.5     1.1575                               H2O
700 0.1684 1098.7 1176.6       1.3073           1003.9 1058.1     1.1944
750 0.2030 1155.2 1249.1       1.3686           1114.7 1197.1     1.3122

 800 0.2291 1195.7 1301.7      1.4112  0.1757 1167.6 1265.2       1.3675
 900 0.2712 1259.9 1385.4      1.4752  0.2160 1241.8 1361.7       1.4414
1000 0.3069 1315.2 1457.2      1.5262  0.2485 1301.7 1439.6       1.4967

1100 0.3393 1366.8 1523.8      1.5704  0.2772 1356.2 1510.1       1.5434
1200 0.3696 1416.7 1587.7      1.6101  0.3086 1408.0 1576.6       1.5848
1300 0.3984 1465.7 1650.0      1.6465  0.3285 1458.5 1640.9       1.6224

1400 0.4261 1514.2 1711.3      1.6804  0.3524 1508.1 1703.7       1.6571
1500 0.4531 1562.5 1772.1      1.7123  0.3754 1557.3 1765.7       1.6896
1600 0.4795 1610.8 1832.6      1.7424  0.3978 1606.3 1827.1       1.7201

            p  3500 lbf/in.2                    p  4000 lbf/in.2

650 0.0249 663.5 679.7         0.8630  0.0245   657.7 675.8       0.8574
700 0.0306 759.5 779.3         0.9506  0.0287   742.1 763.4       0.9345
750 0.1046 1058.4 1126.1       1.2440  0.0633   960.7 1007.5      1.1395

 800 0.1363 1134.7 1223.0      1.3226  0.1052 1095.0 1172.9       1.2740
 900 0.1763 1222.4 1336.5      1.4096  0.1462 1201.5 1309.7       1.3789
1000 0.2066 1287.6 1421.4      1.4699  0.1752 1272.9 1402.6       1.4449

1100 0.2328 1345.2 1496.0      1.5193  0.1995 1333.9 1481.6       1.4973
1200 0.2566 1399.2 1565.3      1.5624  0.2213 1390.1 1553.9       1.5423
1300 0.2787 1451.1 1631.7      1.6012  0.2414 1443.7 1622.4       1.5823

1400 0.2997 1501.9 1696.1      1.6368  0.2603 1495.7 1688.4       1.6188
1500 0.3199 1552.0 1759.2      1.6699  0.2784 1546.7 1752.8       1.6526
1600 0.3395 1601.7 1831.6      1.7010  0.2959 1597.1 1816.1       1.6841

            p  4400 lbf/in.2                    p  4800 lbf/in.2

650 0.0242  653.6       673.3  0.8535  0.0237   649.8  671.0      0.8499
700 0.0278  732.7       755.3  0.9257  0.0271   725.1  749.1      0.9187
750 0.0415  870.8       904.6  1.0513  0.0352   832.6  863.9      1.0154

 800 0.0844 1056.5 1125.3      1.2306  0.0668 1011.2 1070.5       1.1827
 900 0.1270 1183.7 1287.1      1.3548  0.1109 1164.8 1263.4       1.3310
1000 0.1552 1260.8 1387.2      1.4260  0.1385 1248.3 1317.4       1.4078

1100 0.1784 1324.7 1469.9      1.4809  0.1608 1315.3 1458.1       1.4653
1200 0.1989 1382.8 1544.7      1.5274  0.1802 1375.4 1535.4       1.5133
1300 0.2176 1437.7 1614.9      1.5685  0.1979 1431.7 1607.4       1.5555

1400 0.2352 1490.7 1682.3      1.6057  0.2143 1485.7 1676.1       1.5934
1500 0.2520 1542.7 1747.6      1.6399  0.2300 1538.2 1742.5       1.6282
1600 0.2681 1593.4 1811.7      1.6718  0.2450 1589.8 1807.4       1.6605
     778 Tables in English Units

     TABLE A-5E Properties of Compressed Liquid Water

                                  T  v  u      h          s                  v     u      h          s
                                                                           ft3/lb
                                  F  ft3/lb Btu /lb Btu /lb Btu /lb # R            Btu/lb Btu/lb Btu/lb # R
                                                                         0.015967
                                        p  500 lbf/in.2                  0.015972  p  1000 lbf/in.2
                                        (Tsat  467.1F)                   0.016082  (Tsat  544.7F)

H2O   32 0.015994                        0.00   1.49      0.00000                   0.03   2.99      0.00005
      50 0.015998                       18.02  19.50      0.03599                  17.99  20.94      0.03592
     100 0.016106                       67.87  69.36      0.12932                  67.70  70.68      0.12901

     150 0.016318 117.66 119.17                           0.21457        0.016293 117.38 120.40      0.21410
     200 0.016608 167.65 169.19                           0.29341        0.016580 167.26 170.32      0.29281
     300 0.017416 268.92 270.53                           0.43641        0.017379 268.24 271.46      0.43552

     400 0.018608 373.68 375.40 0.56604                                  0.018550 372.55 375.98 0.56472
     Sat. 0.019748 447.70 449.53 0.64904                                 0.021591 538.39 542.38 0.74320

                                        p  1500 lbf/in.2                           p  2000 lbf/in.2
                                        (Tsat  596.4F)                             (Tsat  636.0F)

      32 0.015939                        0.05   4.47      0.00007        0.015912   0.06   5.95      0.00008
      50 0.015946                       17.95  22.38      0.03584        0.015920  17.91  23.81      0.03575
     100 0.016058                       67.53  71.99      0.12870        0.016034  67.37  73.30      0.12839

     150 0.016268 117.10 121.62                           0.21364        0.016244  116.83 122.84     0.21318
     200 0.016554 166.87 171.46                           0.29221        0.016527  166.49 172.60     0.29162
     300 0.017343 267.58 272.39                           0.43463        0.017308  266.93 273.33     0.43376

     400 0.018493 371.45 376.59                           0.56343        0.018439  370.38 377.21     0.56216
     500 0.02024 481.8 487.4                              0.6853         0.02014   479.8 487.3       0.6832
     Sat. 0.02346 605.0 611.5                             0.8082         0.02565   662.4 671.9       0.8623

                                        p  3000 lbf/in.2                           p  4000 lbf/in.2
                                        (Tsat  695.5F)

      32 0.015859                        0.09   8.90      0.00009        0.015807   0.10  11.80      0.00005
      50 0.015870                       17.84  26.65      0.03555        0.015821  17.76  29.47      0.03534
     100 0.015987                       67.04  75.91      0.12777        0.015942  66.72  78.52      0.12714

     150 0.016196 116.30 125.29                           0.21226        0.016150 115.77 127.73      0.21136
     200 0.016476 165.74 174.89                           0.29046        0.016425 165.02 177.18      0.28931
     300 0.017240 265.66 275.23                           0.43205        0.017174 264.43 277.15      0.43038

     400 0.018334 368.32 378.50                           0.55970        0.018235 366.35 379.85      0.55734
     500 0.019944 476.2 487.3                             0.6794         0.019766 472.9 487.5        0.6758
     Sat. 0.034310 783.5 802.5                            0.9732
                                                                                     Tables in English Units 779

TABLE A-6E Properties of Saturated Water (Solid­Vapor): Temperature Table

                  Specific Volume  Internal Energy                         Enthalpy          Entropy
                        ft3/lb          Btu/lb                              Btu/lb          Btu/lb # R

Temp.   Press.    Sat.       Sat.  Sat.   Subl.      Sat.  Sat.            Subl.      Sat.  Sat.   Subl.   Sat.
  F     lbf/in.2  Solid            Solid   uig      Vapor  Solid            hig      Vapor  Solid   sig   Vapor
                            Vapor
                    vi    vg  103    ui               ug     hi                        hg     si             sg

32.018  .0887     .01747  3.302    143.34 1164.6 1021.2 143.34 1218.7 1075.4 .292 2.479 2.187                     H2O
32      .0886     .01747  3.305    143.35 1164.6 1021.2 143.35 1218.7 1075.4 .292 2.479 2.187
30      .0808     .01747  3.607    144.35 1164.9 1020.5 144.35 1218.9 1074.5 .294 2.489 2.195

25      .0641 .01746      4.506 146.84 1165.7 1018.9 146.84 1219.1 1072.3 .299 2.515 2.216

20      .0505 .01745      5.655 149.31 1166.5 1017.2 149.31 1219.4 1070.1 .304 2.542 2.238

15      .0396 .01745      7.13 151.75 1167.3 1015.5 151.75 1219.7 1067.9 .309 2.569 2.260

10      .0309 .01744      9.04 154.17 1168.1 1013.9 154.17 1219.9 1065.7 .314 2.597 2.283

5       .0240 .01743 11.52 156.56 1168.8 1012.2 156.56 1220.1 1063.5 .320 2.626 2.306

0       .0185 .01743 14.77 158.93 1169.5 1010.6 158.93 1220.2 1061.2 .325 2.655 2.330

5       .0142 .01742 19.03 161.27 1170.2 1008.9 161.27 1220.3 1059.0 .330 2.684 2.354

10      .0109 .01741 24.66 163.59 1170.9 1007.3 163.59 1220.4 1056.8 .335 2.714 2.379

15      .0082 .01740 32.2          165.89 1171.5 1005.6 165.89 1220.5 1054.6 .340 2.745 2.405

20      .0062 .01740 42.2          168.16 1172.1 1003.9 168.16 1220.6 1052.4 .345 2.776 2.431

25      .0046 .01739 55.7          170.40 1172.7 1002.3 170.40 1220.6 1050.2 .351 2.808 2.457

30      .0035 .01738 74.1          172.63 1173.2 1000.6 172.63 1220.6 1048.0 .356 2.841 2.485

35      .0026 .01737 99.2          174.82 1173.8 998.9 174.82 1220.6 1045.8 .361 2.874 2.513

40      .0019 .01737 133.8         177.00 1174.3 997.3 177.00 1220.6 1043.6 .366 2.908 2.542
      780 Tables in English Units

      TABLE A-7E Properties of Saturated Refrigerant 22 (Liquid­Vapor): Temperature Table

                       Specific Volume     Internal Energy            Enthalpy              Entropy
                             ft3/lb             Btu/lb                 Btu/lb              Btu/lb # R

      Temp.  Press.     Sat.        Sat.    Sat.    Sat.     Sat.     Evap.      Sat.       Sat.      Sat.                               Temp.
        F    lbf/in.2  Liquid      Vapor   Liquid  Vapor    Liquid     hfg      Vapor      Liquid    Vapor                                 F

       80      4.781     vf          vg      uf      ug       hf                  hg          sf       sg                                80
       60      8.834                                                                                                                     60
R-22   55    10.187    0.01090     9.6984  10.30   87.24    10.29     106.11     95.82     0.0257    0.2538                              55
       50    11.701    0.01113     5.4744   5.20   89.16     5.18     103.30     98.12     0.0126    0.2458                              50
       45    13.387    0.01120     4.7933   3.91   89.64     3.89     102.58     98.68     0.0094    0.2441                              45
       40    15.261    0.01126     4.2123   2.62   90.12     2.60     101.84     99.24     0.0063    0.2424                              40
                       0.01132     3.7147   1.33   90.59     1.30     101.10     99.80     0.0031    0.2407
                       0.01139     3.2869   0.03   91.07              100.35    100.35               0.2391                              35
                                                                0.00                         0.0000                                      30
                                                                                                                                         25
      35 17.335 0.01145 2.9176             1.27 91.54       1.31 99.59 100.90              0.0031    0.2376                              20
      30 19.624 0.01152 2.5976             2.58 92.00       2.62 98.82 101.44              0.0061    0.2361                              15
      25 22.142 0.01159 2.3195             3.89 92.47       3.94 98.04 101.98              0.0092    0.2347
      20 24.906 0.01166 2.0768             5.21 92.93       5.26 97.24 102.50              0.0122    0.2334                              10
      15 27.931 0.01173 1.8644             6.53 93.38       6.59 96.43 103.03              0.0152    0.2321                                5
                                                                                                                                             0
      10 31.233 0.01181 1.6780             7.86 93.84       7.93 95.61 103.54 0.0182 0.2308                                                  5
                                                                                                                                            10
      5 34.829 0.01188 1.5138              9.19 94.28       9.27 94.78 104.05 0.0211 0.2296
                                                                                                                                            15
      0 38.734 0.01196 1.3688 10.53 94.73 10.62 93.93 104.55 0.0240 0.2284                                                                  20
                                                                                                                                            25
      5 42.967 0.01204 1.2404 11.88 95.17 11.97 93.06 105.04 0.0270 0.2272                                                                  30
                                                                                                                                            35
      10 47.545 0.01212 1.1264 13.23 95.60 13.33 92.18 105.52 0.0298 0.2261
                                                                                                                                            40
      15 52.486 0.01220 1.0248 14.58 96.03 14.70 91.29 105.99 0.0327 0.2250                                                                 45
      20 57.808 0.01229 0.9342 15.95 96.45 16.08 90.38 106.45 0.0356 0.2240                                                                 50
      25 63.529 0.01237 0.8531 17.31 96.87 17.46 89.45 106.90 0.0384 0.2230                                                                 55
      30 69.668 0.01246 0.7804 18.69 97.28 18.85 88.50 107.35 0.0412 0.2220                                                                 60
      35 76.245 0.01255 0.7150 20.07 97.68 20.25 87.53 107.78 0.0441 0.2210                                                                 65

      40 83.278 0.01265 0.6561             21.46   98.08    21.66     86.54     108.20     0.0468    0.2200                                 70
      45 90.787 0.01275 0.6029             22.86   98.47    23.07     85.53     108.60     0.0496    0.2191                                 75
      50 98.792 0.01285 0.5548             24.27   98.84    24.50     84.49     108.99     0.0524    0.2182                                 80
      55 107.31 0.01295 0.5112             25.68   99.22    25.94     83.44     109.37     0.0552    0.2173                                 85
      60 116.37 0.01306 0.4716             27.10   99.58    27.38     82.36     109.74     0.0579    0.2164                                 90
      65 125.98 0.01317 0.4355             28.53   99.93    28.84     81.25     110.09     0.0607    0.2155                                 95

      70 136.18        0.01328     0.4027  29.98   100.27   30.31     80.11     110.42     0.0634    0.2147                               100
      75 146.97        0.01340     0.3726  31.43   100.60   31.79     78.95     110.74     0.0661    0.2138                               105
      80 158.38        0.01352     0.3452  32.89   100.92   33.29     77.75     111.04     0.0689    0.2130                               110
      85 170.44        0.01365     0.3200  34.36   101.22   34.80     76.53     111.32     0.0716    0.2121                               115
      90 183.16        0.01378     0.2969  35.85   101.51   36.32     75.26     111.58     0.0743    0.2113                               120
      95 196.57        0.01392     0.2756  37.35   101.79   37.86     73.96     111.82     0.0771    0.2104                               140

      100 210.69       0.01407     0.2560  38.86   102.05   39.41     72.63     112.04     0.0798    0.2095
      105 225.54       0.01422     0.2379  40.39   102.29   40.99     71.24     112.23     0.0825    0.2087
      110 241.15       0.01438     0.2212  41.94   102.52   42.58     69.82     112.40     0.0852    0.2078
      115 257.55       0.01455     0.2058  43.50   102.72   44.19     68.34     112.53     0.0880    0.2069
      120 274.75       0.01472     0.1914  45.08   102.90   45.83     66.81     112.64     0.0907    0.2060
      140 352.17       0.01555     0.1433  51.62   103.36   52.64     60.06     112.70     0.1019    0.2021

      Source: Tables A-7E through A-9E are calculated based on equations from A. Kamei and S. W. Beyerlein, "A Fundamental Equation for
      Chlorodifluoromethane (R-22)," Fluid Phase Equilibria, Vol. 80, No. 11, 1992, pp. 71­86.
                                                                                          Tables in English Units 781

TABLE A-8E Properties of Saturated Refrigerant 22 (Liquid­Vapor): Pressure Table

                 Specific Volume  Internal Energy          Enthalpy                        Entropy
                       ft3/lb          Btu/lb               Btu/lb                        Btu/lb # R

Press.    Temp.   Sat.     Sat.    Sat.    Sat.     Sat.    Evap.                  Sat.    Sat.      Sat.   Press.
lbf/in.2     F   Liquid   Vapor   Liquid  Vapor    Liquid     hfg                 Vapor   Liquid    Vapor   lbf/in.2

     5    78.62    vf       vg      uf      ug       hf     105.92                  hg       sf       sg        5
   10     55.66                                             102.67                                             10
   15     40.67  0.01091  9.3014  9.95    87.37    9.93     100.45                 95.98  0.0248    0.2532     15
   20     29.22  0.01119  4.8769  4.08    89.58    4.06                            98.61  0.0098    0.2443     20
   25     19.84  0.01138  3.3402  0.21    91.00    0.17      98.70                100.28  0.0004    0.2393     25
                 0.01153  2.5518          92.07              97.22                101.52            0.2359
                 0.01166  2.0695    2.78  92.94      2.83                         102.52    0.0066  0.2333     30
                                                     5.31                                                      35
                                    5.25                                                    0.0123             40
                                                                                                               45
30 11.82 0.01178 1.7430           7.38 93.67       7.44 95.91 103.35                      0.0171    0.2313     50      R-22
                                                                                          0.0212    0.2295
35        4.77 0.01189 1.5068     9.25 94.30       9.33 94.74 104.07                      0.0249    0.2280     55
                                                                                          0.0283    0.2267     60
40        1.54 0.01198 1.3277 10.94 94.86 11.03 93.66 104.70                              0.0313    0.2256     65
                                                                                                               70
45        7.27 0.01207 1.1870 12.49 95.37 12.59 92.67 105.26                                                   75

50        12.53 0.01216 1.0735 13.91 95.82 14.03 91.73 105.76                                                  80
                                                                                                               85
55        17.41 0.01224 0.9799 15.24 96.23 15.36 90.85 106.21                             0.0341    0.2245     90
                                                                                          0.0367    0.2236     95
60        21.96 0.01232 0.9014 16.48 96.62 16.62 90.01 106.63                             0.0391    0.2227   100
                                                                                          0.0414    0.2219
65        26.23 0.01239 0.8345 17.65 96.97 17.80 89.21 107.01                             0.0435    0.2212   110
                                                                                                             120
70        30.26 0.01247 0.7768 18.76 97.30 18.92 88.45 107.37                                                130
                                                                                                             140
75        34.08 0.01254 0.7265 19.82 97.61 19.99 87.71 107.70                                                150

80        37.71 0.01260 0.6823 20.83 97.90 21.01 86.99 108.00                             0.0456    0.2205   160
                                                                                          0.0475    0.2198   170
85        41.18 0.01267 0.6431 21.79 98.17 21.99 86.30 108.29                             0.0494    0.2192   180
                                                                                          0.0511    0.2186   190
90        44.49 0.01274 0.6081 22.72 98.43 22.93 85.63 108.56                             0.0528    0.2181   200

95        47.67 0.01280 0.5766 23.61 98.67 23.84 84.98 108.81                                                225
                                                                                                             250
100       50.73 0.01286 0.5482 24.47 98.90 24.71 84.34 109.05                                                275
                                                                                                             300
110       56.52 0.01298 0.4988 26.11 99.33 26.37 83.11 109.49                             0.0560    0.2170   325
                                                                                          0.0590    0.2161   350
120       61.92 0.01310 0.4573 27.65 99.71 27.94 81.93 109.88                             0.0618    0.2152
                                                                                          0.0644    0.2144
130       67.00 0.01321 0.4220 29.11 100.07 29.43 80.80 110.22                            0.0669    0.2136

140       71.80 0.01332 0.3915 30.50 100.39 30.84 79.70 110.54

150       76.36 0.01343 0.3649 31.82 100.69 32.20 78.63 110.82

160       80.69 0.01354 0.3416 33.09 100.96 33.49 77.59 111.08                            0.0693    0.2128
                                                                                          0.0715    0.2121
170       84.82 0.01365 0.3208 34.31 101.21 34.74 76.57 111.31                            0.0737    0.2115
                                                                                          0.0757    0.2108
180       88.78 0.01375 0.3023 35.49 101.44 35.95 75.57 111.52                            0.0777    0.2102

190       92.58 0.01386 0.2857 36.62 101.66 37.11 74.60 111.71

200       96.24 0.01396 0.2706 37.72 101.86 38.24 73.64 111.88

225       104.82 0.01422 0.2386 40.34 102.28 40.93 71.29 112.22                           0.0824    0.2087
                                                                                          0.0867    0.2073
250       112.73 0.01447 0.2126 42.79 102.63 43.46 69.02 112.47                           0.0908    0.2060
                                                                                          0.0946    0.2047
275       120.07 0.01473 0.1912 45.10 102.91 45.85 66.79 112.64                           0.0982    0.2034
                                                                                          0.1016    0.2022
300       126.94 0.01499 0.1732 47.30 103.11 48.14 64.60 112.73

325       133.39 0.01525 0.1577 49.42 103.26 50.33 62.42 112.75

350       139.49 0.01552 0.1444 51.45 103.35 52.46 60.25 112.71
      782 Tables in English Units

      TABLE A-9E Properties of Superheated Refrigerant 22 Vapor

                                   T  v  u      h            s          v     u       h         s
                                                                      ft3/lb
                                   F ft3/lb Btu/lb Btu/lb Btu/lb # R          Btu/lb Btu/lb Btu/lb # R

                                           p  5 lbf/in.2                        p  10 lbf/in.2
                                         (Tsat  78.62F)                       (Tsat  55.66F)

      Sat. 9.3014                        87.37   95.98       0.2532   4.8769  89.58 98.61 0.2443
      70 9.5244                          88.31   97.13       0.2562
R-22  60 9.7823                          89.43   98.48       0.2596   4.9522   90.23   99.40    0.2462
                                                                      5.0846   91.39  100.81    0.2496
      50 10.0391                         90.55   99.84       0.2630   5.2163   92.57  102.23    0.2530
      40 10.2952                         91.69  101.22       0.2663   5.3472
      30 10.5506                         92.84  102.61       0.2696   5.4775   93.75  103.65    0.2563
                                                                      5.6073   94.95  105.09    0.2595
      20 10.8054                         94.01  104.01       0.2728            96.16  106.55    0.2627
      10 11.0596                         95.19  105.43       0.2760
                                         96.39  106.87       0.2791            97.39  108.01    0.2658
          0 11.3133                                                            98.63  109.49    0.2690
                                                                               99.88  110.98    0.2720
                                   10 11.5666 97.60 108.31   0.2822   5.7366  101.15  112.49    0.2751
                                   20 11.8195 98.83 109.77   0.2853   5.8655
                                   30 12.0720 100.07 111.25  0.2884   5.9941
                                   40 12.3242 101.33 112.74  0.2914   6.1223

                                           p  15 lbf/in.2                       p  20 lbf/in.2
                                         (Tsat  40.67F)                       (Tsat  29.22F)

      Sat. 3.3402 91.00 100.28                               0.2393   2.5518  92.07 101.52 0.2359
      40 3.3463 91.08 100.38                                 0.2396
      30 3.4370 92.28 101.83                                 0.2430

      20 3.5268 93.49 103.28                                 0.2463   2.6158   93.21  102.90    0.2391
      10 3.6160 94.70 104.75                                 0.2496   2.6846   94.45  104.39    0.2424
                                                             0.2529   2.7528   95.69  105.89    0.2457
          0 3.7046 95.93 106.22
                                                                      2.8204   96.95  107.39    0.2490
                                   10 3.7927 97.17 107.71    0.2561   2.8875   98.22  108.91    0.2522
                                   20 3.8804 98.43 109.20    0.2592   2.9542   99.49  110.43    0.2553
                                   30 3.9677 99.69 110.71    0.2623
                                                                      3.0205  100.78  111.97    0.2584
                                   40 4.0546 100.97 112.23   0.2654   3.0865  102.09  113.52    0.2615
                                   50 4.1412 102.26 113.76   0.2684   3.1522  103.40  115.08    0.2645
                                   60 4.2275 103.57 115.31   0.2714   3.2176  104.73  116.65    0.2675
                                   70 4.3136 104.89 116.87   0.2744

                                           p  25 lbf/in.2                       p  30 lbf/in.2
                                         (Tsat  19.84F)                       (Tsat  11.82F)

      Sat. 2.0695 92.94 102.52                               0.2333   1.7430  93.67 103.35      0.2313
      10 2.1252 94.18 104.02                                 0.2367   1.7518  93.91 103.64      0.2319
                                                             0.2400   1.7997  95.19 105.19      0.2353
          0 2.1812 95.45 105.54
                                                                      1.8470
                                   10 2.2365 96.72 107.07    0.2433   1.8937  96.48 106.74      0.2386
                                   20 2.2914 98.00 108.61    0.2466   1.9400  97.78 108.30      0.2419
                                   30 2.3458 99.29 110.15    0.2498           99.09 109.86      0.2451
                                                                      1.9858
                                   40 2.3998 100.59 111.70   0.2529   2.0313  100.40 111.43     0.2483
                                   50 2.4535 101.91 113.27   0.2560   2.0764  101.73 113.01     0.2514
                                   60 2.5068 103.23 114.84   0.2590           103.06 114.60     0.2545
                                                                      2.1213
                                    70 2.5599 104.57 116.42  0.2621   2.1659  104.41  116.19    0.2576
                                    80 2.6127 105.92 118.01  0.2650   2.2103  105.77  117.80    0.2606
                                    90 2.6654 107.28 119.62  0.2680   2.2545  107.13  119.41    0.2635
                                   100 2.7178 108.65 121.24  0.2709           108.52  121.04    0.2665
                                                                       Tables in English Units 783

TABLE A-9E (Continued )

T  v  u                  h  s          v     u       h         s
                                     ft3/lb
F ft3/lb Btu/lb Btu/lb Btu/lb # R            Btu/lb Btu/lb Btu/lb # R
                                    1.0735
      p  40 lbf/in.2                         p  50 lbf/in.2
      (Tsat  1.54F)                          (Tsat  12.53F)

Sat. 1.3277 94.86 104.70    0.2280           95.82 105.76 0.2256
 10 1.3593 95.99 106.06     0.2310
 20 1.3960 97.33 107.67     0.2343  1.0965    96.85  107.00    0.2282

30 1.4321 98.66 109.27      0.2376  1.1268    98.22  108.65    0.2316
40 1.4678 100.01 110.88     0.2409  1.1565    99.59  110.30    0.2349
50 1.5032 101.35 112.49     0.2441  1.1858   100.97  111.95    0.2382

60 1.5381 102.71 114.10     0.2472  1.2147   102.35  113.60    0.2414                               R-22
70 1.5728 104.08 115.73     0.2503  1.2433   103.74  115.25    0.2445
80 1.6071 105.45 117.36     0.2534  1.2716   105.13  116.90    0.2476

 90 1.6413 106.84 118.99    0.2564  1.2996   106.53  118.57    0.2507
100 1.6752 108.23 120.64    0.2593  1.3274   107.95  120.24    0.2537
110 1.7089 109.64 122.30    0.2623  1.3549   109.37  121.91    0.2567
120 1.7424 111.06 123.97    0.2652  1.3823   110.80  123.60    0.2596

      p  60 lbf/in.2                           p  70 lbf/in.2
      (Tsat  21.96F)                          (Tsat  30.26F)

Sat. 0.9014 96.62 106.63    0.2236  0.7768   97.30 107.37      0.2219
 30 0.9226 97.75 108.00     0.2264
 40 0.9485 99.16 109.70     0.2298  0.7994    98.71  109.07    0.2254

50 0.9739 100.57 111.39     0.2332  0.8221   100.15  110.81    0.2288
60 0.9988 101.98 113.07     0.2365  0.8443   101.59  112.53    0.2321
70 1.0234 103.39 114.76     0.2397  0.8660   103.03  114.25    0.2354

 80 1.0476 104.80 116.44    0.2428  0.8874   104.46  115.97    0.2386
 90 1.0716 106.22 118.13    0.2459  0.9086   105.90  117.68    0.2418
100 1.0953 107.65 119.82    0.2490  0.9294   107.35  119.40    0.2449

110 1.1188 109.09 121.52    0.2520  0.9500   108.80  121.12    0.2479
120 1.1421 110.53 123.22    0.2549  0.9704   110.26  122.84    0.2509
130 1.1653 111.99 124.93    0.2579  0.9907   111.73  124.57    0.2539
140 1.1883 113.45 126.65    0.2608  1.0107   113.21  126.31    0.2568

      p  80 lbf/in.2                           p  90 lbf/in.2
      (Tsat 37.71F)                           (Tsat  44.49F)

Sat. 0.6823 97.90 108.00    0.2205  0.6081   98.43 108.56      0.2192
 40 0.6871 98.24 108.42     0.2213
 50 0.7079 99.72 110.20     0.2248  0.6186    99.26  109.57    0.2212

60 0.7280 101.19 111.97     0.2283  0.6373   100.77  111.39    0.2247
70 0.7478 102.65 113.73     0.2316  0.6555   102.27  113.19    0.2282
80 0.7671 104.11 115.48     0.2349  0.6733   103.76  114.98    0.2315

 90 0.7861 105.58 117.22    0.2381  0.6907   105.24  116.75    0.2348
100 0.8048 107.04 118.97    0.2412  0.7078   106.73  118.52    0.2380
110 0.8233 108.51 120.71    0.2443  0.7246   108.22  120.29    0.2411

120 0.8416 109.99 122.45    0.2474  0.7412   109.71  122.06    0.2442
130 0.8596 111.47 124.20    0.2504  0.7576   111.20  123.83    0.2472
140 0.8775 112.96 125.96    0.2533  0.7739   112.71  125.60    0.2502
150 0.8953 114.46 127.72    0.2562  0.7899   114.22  127.38    0.2531
      784 Tables in English Units

      TABLE A-9E (Continued )

                                   T  v  u  h                 s          v     u       h          s
                                                                       ft3/lb
                                   F ft3/lb Btu/lb Btu/lb Btu/lb # R           Btu/lb Btu/lb Btu/lb # R
                                                                      0.4573
                                         p  100 lbf/in.2                       p  120 lbf/in.2
                                         (Tsat  50.73F)                        (Tsat  61.92F)

                                   Sat. 0.5482 98.90 109.05   0.2181           99.71 109.88 0.2161
                                    60 0.5645 100.33 110.79   0.2214
R-22                                80 0.5980 103.38 114.46   0.2284  0.4846   102.60  113.37     0.2227

                                   100 0.6300 106.40 118.07   0.2349  0.5130   105.73  117.13     0.2295
                                   120 0.6609 109.42 121.66   0.2412  0.5400   108.83  120.83     0.2360
                                   140 0.6908 112.45 125.24   0.2473  0.5661   111.92  124.50     0.2422

                                   160 0.7201 115.50 128.83   0.2532  0.5914   115.02  128.16     0.2482
                                   180 0.7489 118.58 132.45   0.2589  0.6161   118.15  131.84     0.2541
                                   200 0.7771 121.69 136.08   0.2645  0.6404   121.30  135.53     0.2597

                                   220 0.8051 124.84 139.75   0.2700  0.6642   124.48  139.24     0.2653
                                   240 0.8327 128.04 143.45   0.2754  0.6878   127.69  142.98     0.2707
                                   260 0.8600 131.27 147.19   0.2806  0.7110   130.95  146.75     0.2760

                                   280 0.8871 134.54 150.97   0.2858  0.7340   134.24  150.55     0.2812
                                   300 0.9140 137.85 154.78   0.2909  0.7568   137.57  154.39     0.2863

                                         p  140 lbf/in.2                         p  160 lbf/in.2
                                         (Tsat  71.80F)                          (Tsat  80.69F)

                                   Sat. 0.3915 100.39 110.54  0.2144  0.3416   100.96 111.08      0.2128
                                    80 0.4028 101.76 112.20   0.2175
                                   100 0.4289 105.02 116.14   0.2246  0.3653   104.26  115.08     0.2201

                                   120 0.4534 108.21 119.96   0.2313  0.3881   107.56  119.06     0.2271
                                   140 0.4768 111.37 123.73   0.2377  0.4095   110.81  122.94     0.2337
                                   160 0.4993 114.53 127.48   0.2439  0.4301   114.03  126.77     0.2400

                                   180 0.5212 117.70 131.21   0.2498  0.4499   117.25  130.57     0.2460
                                   200 0.5426 120.89 134.96   0.2556  0.4692   120.47  134.37     0.2518
                                   220 0.5636 124.10 138.71   0.2612  0.4880   123.72  138.18     0.2575

                                   240 0.5842 127.35 142.49   0.2666  0.5065   126.99  142.00     0.2631
                                   260 0.6045 130.62 146.30   0.2720  0.5246   130.30  145.84     0.2685
                                   280 0.6246 133.94 150.13   0.2773  0.5425   133.63  149.70     0.2738

                                   300 0.6445 137.29 154.00   0.2824  0.5602   137.00  153.60     0.2790
                                   320 0.6642 140.68 157.89   0.2875  0.5777   140.41  157.62     0.2841

                                         p  180 lbf/in.2                         p  200 lbf/in.2
                                         (Tsat  88.78F)                          (Tsat  96.24F)

                                   Sat. 0.3023 101.44 111.52  0.2115  0.2706   101.86 111.88      0.2102
                                   100 0.3154 103.44 113.95   0.2159  0.2748   102.56 112.73      0.2117
                                   120 0.3369 106.88 118.11   0.2231  0.2957   106.15 117.10      0.2194

                                   140 0.3570 110.21 122.11   0.2299  0.3148   109.59 121.25      0.2264
                                   160 0.3761 113.50 126.04   0.2364  0.3327   112.96 125.28      0.2330
                                   180 0.3943 116.78 129.92   0.2425  0.3497   116.29 129.25      0.2393

                                   200 0.4120 120.05 133.78   0.2485  0.3661   119.61 133.17      0.2454
                                   220 0.4292 123.33 137.64   0.2542  0.3820   122.94 137.08      0.2512
                                   240 0.4459 126.64 141.50   0.2598  0.3975   126.27 140.99      0.2569

                                   260 0.4624 129.96 145.38   0.2653  0.4126   129.63 144.91      0.2624
                                   280 0.4786 133.32 149.28   0.2706  0.4275   133.01 148.84      0.2678
                                   300 0.4946 136.71 153.20   0.2759  0.4422   136.42 152.79      0.2731

                                   320 0.5104 140.13 157.15   0.2810  0.4566   139.86 156.77      0.2782
                                   340 0.5260 143.59 161.12   0.2860  0.4709   143.33 160.77      0.2833
                                                                       Tables in English Units 785

TABLE A-9E (Continued)

T  v  u                 h  s          v     u       h          s
                                    ft3/lb
F ft3/lb Btu/lb Btu/lb Btu/lb # R           Btu/lb Btu/lb Btu/lb # R
                                   0.2126
      p  225 lbf/in.2              0.2198   p  250 lbf/in.2
      (Tsat  104.82F)              0.2378   (Tsat  112.73F)
                                   0.2540
Sat. 0.2386 102.28 112.22  0.2087  0.2690   102.63 112.47      0.2073
120 0.2539 105.17 115.75   0.2149  0.2833   104.10 114.27      0.2104
140 0.2722 108.78 120.12   0.2223  0.2969   107.90 118.91      0.2183
                                   0.3101
160 0.2891 112.26 124.30   0.2291  0.3229   111.51 123.27      0.2255
180 0.3050 115.67 128.38   0.2356  0.3354   115.02 127.48      0.2321
200 0.3202 119.06 132.40   0.2418  0.3476   118.48 131.59      0.2385
                                   0.3596
220 0.3348 122.43 136.38   0.2477  0.3715   121.91 135.66      0.2445                               R-22
240 0.3490 125.81 140.35   0.2535  0.3831   125.33 139.69      0.2504
260 0.3628 129.20 144.32   0.2591           128.76 143.71      0.2560

280 0.3764 132.61 148.29   0.2645           132.21 147.73      0.2616
300 0.3896 136.05 152.28   0.2699           135.67 151.76      0.2669
320 0.4027 139.51 156.29   0.2751           139.16 155.81      0.2722

340 0.4156 143.00 160.32   0.2802           142.67 159.87      0.2773
360 0.4284 146.33 164.38   0.2852           146.22 163.95      0.2824

      p  275 lbf/in.2                       p  300 lbf/in.2
      (Tsat  120.07F)                       (Tsat  126.94F)

Sat. 0.1912 102.91 112.64  0.2060  0.1732   103.11 112.73      0.2047
140 0.2092 106.96 117.61   0.2144  0.1849   105.93 116.20      0.2105
160 0.2250 110.73 122.19   0.2219  0.2006   109.89 121.04      0.2185

180 0.2395 144.35 126.54   0.2288  0.2146   133.64 125.56      0.2257
200 0.2530 117.88 130.77   0.2353  0.2276   117.26 129.91      0.2324
220 0.2659 121.38 134.91   0.2415  0.2399   120.83 134.15      0.2387

240 0.2782 124.85 139.02   0.2475  0.2516   124.35 138.33      0.2447
260 0.2902 128.32 143.10   0.2532  0.2629   127.87 142.47      0.2506
280 0.3018 131.80 147.17   0.2588  0.2739   131.38 146.59      0.2562

300 0.3132 135.29 151.24   0.2642  0.2845   134.90  150.71     0.2617
320 0.3243 138.80 155.32   0.2695  0.2949   138.44  154.83     0.2671
340 0.3353 142.34 159.41   0.2747  0.3051   142.00  158.95     0.2723
360 0.3461 145.90 163.53   0.2798  0.3152   145.58  163.09     0.2774

      p  325 lbf/in.2                         p  350 lbf/in.2
      (Tsat  133.39F)                         (Tsat  139.49F)

Sat. 0.1577 103.26 112.75  0.2034  0.1444   103.35 112.71      0.2022
140 0.1637 104.78 114.63   0.2066  0.1448   103.48 112.86      0.2024
160 0.1796 109.00 119.81   0.2151  0.1605   107.90 118.30      0.2113

180 0.1934 112.89 124.53   0.2226  0.1747   112.06 123.38      0.2194
200 0.2061 116.62 129.02   0.2295  0.1874   115.95 128.10      0.2267
220 0.2179 120.26 133.37   0.2360  0.1987   119.65 132.53      0.2333

240 0.2291 123.84 137.63   0.2422  0.2095   123.31 136.89      0.2396
260 0.2398 127.40 141.83   0.2481  0.2199   126.93 141.18      0.2457
280 0.2501 130.96 146.01   0.2538  0.2297   130.52 145.41      0.2514

300 0.2602 134.51 150.17   0.2593  0.2393   134.12 149.62      0.2571
320 0.2700 138.08 154.33   0.2647  0.2486   137.71 153.82      0.2626
340 0.2796 141.66 158.49   0.2700  0.2577   141.32 158.02      0.2679

360 0.2891 145.26 162.66   0.2752  0.2666   144.95 162.23      0.2730
380 0.2983 148.89 166.85   0.2802  0.2754   148.59 166.43      0.2781
        786 Tables in English Units

        TABLE A-10E Properties of Saturated Refrigerant 134a (Liquid­Vapor): Temperature Table

                         Specific Volume     Internal Energy          Enthalpy                   Entropy
                               ft3/lb             Btu/lb               Btu/lb                   Btu/lb # R

        Temp.  Press.     Sat.        Sat.    Sat.    Sat.     Sat.    Evap.     Sat.            Sat.    Sat.   Temp.
          F    lbf/in.2  Liquid      Vapor   Liquid  Vapor    Liquid     hfg    Vapor           Liquid  Vapor     F

         40      7.490     vf          vg      uf      ug       hf     95.82      hg               sf     sg     40
         30      9.920                                                 94.49                                     30
         20    12.949    0.01130     5.7173  0.02    87.90      0.00   93.10     95.82          0.0000  0.2283   20
         15    14.718    0.01143     4.3911    2.81  89.26      2.83   92.38     97.32          0.0067  0.2266   15
         10    16.674    0.01156     3.4173    5.69  90.62      5.71   91.64     98.81          0.0133  0.2250   10
                         0.01163     3.0286    7.14  91.30      7.17             99.55          0.0166  0.2243
                         0.01170     2.6918    8.61  91.98      8.65            100.29          0.0199  0.2236

        5      18.831 0.01178 2.3992 10.09 92.66 10.13 90.89 101.02 0.0231 0.2230                               5

        0      21.203 0.01185 2.1440 11.58 93.33 11.63 90.12 101.75 0.0264 0.2224                               0

        5      23.805 0.01193 1.9208 13.09 94.01 13.14 89.33 102.47 0.0296 0.2219                               5

        10     26.651 0.01200 1.7251 14.60 94.68 14.66 88.53 103.19 0.0329 0.2214                               10

        15     29.756 0.01208 1.5529 16.13 95.35 16.20 87.71 103.90 0.0361 0.2209                               15

R-134a  20     33.137 0.01216 1.4009 17.67 96.02 17.74 86.87 104.61 0.0393 0.2205                               20

        25     36.809 0.01225 1.2666 19.22 96.69 19.30 86.02 105.32 0.0426 0.2200                               25

        30     40.788 0.01233 1.1474 20.78 97.35 20.87 85.14 106.01 0.0458 0.2196                               30

        40     49.738 0.01251 0.9470 23.94 98.67 24.05 83.34 107.39 0.0522 0.2189                               40

        50     60.125 0.01270 0.7871 27.14 99.98 27.28 81.46 108.74 0.0585 0.2183                               50

        60     72.092 0.01290 0.6584 30.39 101.27 30.56 79.49 110.05 0.0648 0.2178                              60

        70     85.788 0.01311 0.5538 33.68 102.54 33.89 77.44 111.33 0.0711 0.2173                              70

        80 101.37 0.01334 0.4682 37.02 103.78 37.27 75.29 112.56 0.0774 0.2169                                  80

        85 109.92 0.01346 0.4312 38.72 104.39 38.99 74.17 113.16 0.0805 0.2167                                  85

        90 118.99 0.01358 0.3975 40.42 105.00 40.72 73.03 113.75 0.0836 0.2165                                  90

        95 128.62 0.01371 0.3668 42.14 105.60 42.47 71.86 114.33 0.0867 0.2163                                  95

        100 138.83 0.01385 0.3388 43.87 106.18 44.23 70.66 114.89 0.0898 0.2161 100

        105 149.63 0.01399 0.3131 45.62 106.76 46.01 69.42 115.43 0.0930 0.2159 105

        110 161.04 0.01414 0.2896 47.39 107.33 47.81 68.15 115.96 0.0961 0.2157 110

        115 173.10 0.01429 0.2680 49.17 107.88 49.63 66.84 116.47 0.0992 0.2155 115

          120 185.82 0.01445 0.2481 50.97 108.42 51.47 65.48 116.95 0.1023 0.2153 120
          140 243.86 0.01520 0.1827 58.39 110.41 59.08 59.57 118.65 0.1150 0.2143 140
          160 314.63 0.01617 0.1341 66.26 111.97 67.20 52.58 119.78 0.1280 0.2128 160
          180 400.22 0.01758 0.0964 74.83 112.77 76.13 43.78 119.91 0.1417 0.2101 180
          200 503.52 0.02014 0.0647 84.90 111.66 86.77 30.92 117.69 0.1575 0.2044 200
          210 563.51 0.02329 0.0476 91.84 108.48 94.27 19.18 113.45 0.1684 0.1971 210

        Source: Tables A-10E through A-12E are calculated based on equations from D. P. Wilson and R. S. Basu, "Thermodynamic Properties of a New
        Stratospherically Safe Working Fluid--Refrigerant 134a," ASHRAE Trans., Vol. 94, Pt. 2, 1988, pp. 2095­2118.
                                                                                     Tables in English Units 787

TABLE A-11E Properties of Saturated Refrigerant 134a (Liquid­Vapor): Pressure Table

                   Specific Volume  Internal Energy          Enthalpy                 Entropy
                         ft3/lb          Btu/lb               Btu/lb                 Btu/lb # R

Press.    Temp.     Sat.     Sat.    Sat.    Sat.     Sat.   Evap.      Sat.          Sat.      Sat.   Press.
lbf/in.2     F     Liquid   Vapor   Liquid  Vapor    Liquid   hfg      Vapor         Liquid    Vapor   lbf/in.2

     5    53.48      vf       vg      uf      ug       hf                hg             sf       sg        5
   10     29.71                                                                                           10
   15     14.25    0.01113  8.3508  3.74    86.07    3.73    97.53      93.79        0.0090    0.2311     15
   20      2.48    0.01143  4.3581    2.89  89.30      2.91  94.45      97.37          0.0068  0.2265     20
   30              0.01164  2.9747    7.36  91.40      7.40  92.27      99.66          0.0171  0.2242     30
            15.38  0.01181  2.2661          93.00            90.50     101.39          0.0248  0.2227
                   0.01209  1.5408   10.84  95.40     10.89  87.65     103.96          0.0364  0.2209     40
                                     16.24            16.31                                               50
                                                                                                          60
40        29.04 0.01232 1.1692 20.48 97.23 20.57 85.31 105.88                        0.0452    0.2197     70
                                                                                     0.0523    0.2189     80
50        40.27 0.01252 0.9422 24.02 98.71 24.14 83.29 107.43                        0.0584    0.2183
                                                                                     0.0638    0.2179     90
60        49.89 0.01270 0.7887 27.10 99.96 27.24 81.48 108.72                        0.0686    0.2175   100
                                                                                                        120
70        58.35 0.01286 0.6778 29.85 101.05 30.01 79.82 109.83                                          140
                                                                                                        160
80        65.93 0.01302 0.5938 32.33 102.02 32.53 78.28 110.81
                                                                                                        180
90        72.83 0.01317 0.5278 34.62 102.89 34.84 76.84 111.68                       0.0729    0.2172   200       R-134a
                                                                                     0.0768    0.2169   220
100       79.17 0.01332 0.4747 36.75 103.68 36.99 75.47 112.46                       0.0839    0.2165   240
                                                                                     0.0902    0.2161   260
120       90.54 0.01360 0.3941 40.61 105.06 40.91 72.91 113.82                       0.0958    0.2157
                                                                                                        280
140       100.56 0.01386 0.3358 44.07 106.25 44.43 70.52 114.95                                         300
                                                                                                        350
160       109.56 0.01412 0.2916 47.23 107.28 47.65 68.26 115.91                                         400
                                                                                                        450
180       117.74 0.01438 0.2569 50.16 108.18 50.64 66.10 116.74                      0.1009    0.2154   500
                                                                                     0.1057    0.2151
200       125.28 0.01463 0.2288 52.90 108.98 53.44 64.01 117.44                      0.1101    0.2147
                                                                                     0.1142    0.2144
220       132.27 0.01489 0.2056 55.48 109.68 56.09 61.96 118.05                      0.1181    0.2140

240       138.79 0.01515 0.1861 57.93 110.30 58.61 59.96 118.56

260       144.92 0.01541 0.1695 60.28 110.84 61.02 57.97 118.99

280       150.70 0.01568 0.1550 62.53 111.31 63.34 56.00 119.35                      0.1219    0.2136
                                                                                     0.1254    0.2132
300       156.17 0.01596 0.1424 64.71 111.72 65.59 54.03 119.62                      0.1338    0.2118
                                                                                     0.1417    0.2102
350       168.72 0.01671 0.1166 69.88 112.45 70.97 49.03 120.00                      0.1493    0.2079
                                                                                     0.1570    0.2047
400       179.95 0.01758 0.0965 74.81 112.77 76.11 43.80 119.91

450       190.12 0.01863 0.0800 79.63 112.60 81.18 38.08 119.26

500       199.38 0.02002 0.0657 84.54 111.76 86.39 31.44 117.83
        788 Tables in English Units

        TABLE A-12E Properties of Superheated Refrigerant 134a Vapor

                                     T  v  u  h               s           v     u       h         s
                                                                        ft3/lb
                                     F ft3/lb Btu/lb Btu/lb Btu/lb # R          Btu/lb Btu/lb Btu/lb # R

                                             p  10 lbf/in.2                       p  15 lbf/in.2
                                           (Tsat  29.71F)                       (Tsat  14.25F)

        Sat. 4.3581                        89.30 97.37        0.2265    2.9747  91.40 99.66 0.2242
        20 4.4718                          90.89 99.17        0.2307
                                           94.24 102.94       0.2391    3.0893   93.84  102.42    0.2303
           0 4.7026                                                     3.2468
                                                              0.2472    3.4012   97.33  106.34    0.2386
                                     20 4.9297 97.67 106.79   0.2553    3.5533  100.89  110.33    0.2468
                                     40 5.1539 101.19 110.72  0.2632    3.7034  104.54  114.40    0.2548
                                     60 5.3758 104.80 114.74            3.8520
                                                              0.2709    3.9993  108.28  118.56    0.2626
         80 5.5959 108.50 118.85                              0.2786    4.1456  112.10  122.79    0.2703
        100 5.8145 112.29 123.05                              0.2861    4.2911  116.01  127.11    0.2779
        120 6.0318 116.18 127.34                                        4.4359
                                                              0.2935    4.5801  120.00  131.51    0.2854
R-134a  140 6.2482 120.16 131.72                              0.3009            124.09  136.00    0.2927
        160 6.4638 124.23 136.19                              0.3081            128.26  140.57    0.3000
        180 6.6786 128.38 140.74                              0.3152            132.52  145.23    0.3072
        200 6.8929 132.63 145.39

                                            p  20 lbf/in.2                       p  30 lbf/in.2
                                           (Tsat  2.48F)                         (Tsat  15.38F)

        Sat. 2.2661                        93.00 101.39       0.2227    1.5408  95.40 103.96      0.2209
           0 2.2816                        93.43 101.88       0.2238
         20 2.4046                         96.98 105.88       0.2323    1.5611   96.26  104.92    0.2229

                                     40 2.5244 100.59 109.94  0.2406    1.6465   99.98  109.12    0.2315
                                     60 2.6416 104.28 114.06  0.2487    1.7293  103.75  113.35    0.2398
                                     80 2.7569 108.05 118.25  0.2566    1.8098  107.59  117.63    0.2478

        100 2.8705 111.90 122.52                              0.2644    1.8887  111.49  121.98    0.2558
        120 2.9829 115.83 126.87                              0.2720    1.9662  115.47  126.39    0.2635
        140 3.0942 119.85 131.30                              0.2795    2.0426  119.53  130.87    0.2711

        160 3.2047 123.95 135.81                              0.2869    2.1181  123.66  135.42    0.2786
        180 3.3144 128.13 140.40                              0.2922    2.1929  127.88  140.05    0.2859
        200 3.4236 132.40 145.07                              0.3014    2.2671  132.17  144.76    0.2932
        220 3.5323 136.76 149.83                              0.3085    2.3407  136.55  149.54    0.3003

                                           p  40 lbf/in.2                        p  50 lbf/in.2
                                           (Tsat  29.04F)                        (Tsat  40.27F)

        Sat. 1.1692 97.23 105.88                              0.2197    0.9422  98.71 107.43      0.2189
         40 1.2065 99.33 108.26                               0.2245
         60 1.2723 103.20 112.62                              0.2331    0.9974  102.62  111.85    0.2276

         80 1.3357 107.11 117.00                              0.2414    1.0508  106.62  116.34    0.2361
        100 1.3973 111.08 121.42                              0.2494    1.1022  110.65  120.85    0.2443
        120 1.4575 115.11 125.90                              0.2573    1.1520  114.74  125.39    0.2523

        140 1.5165 119.21 130.43                              0.2650    1.2007  118.88  129.99    0.2601
        160 1.5746 123.38 135.03                              0.2725    1.2484  123.08  134.64    0.2677
        180 1.6319 127.62 139.70                              0.2799    1.2953  127.36  139.34    0.2752

        200 1.6887 131.94 144.44                              0.2872    1.3415  131.71  144.12    0.2825
        220 1.7449 136.34 149.25                              0.2944    1.3873  136.12  148.96    0.2897
        240 1.8006 140.81 154.14                              0.3015    1.4326  140.61  153.87    0.2969

        260 1.8561 145.36 159.10                              0.3085    1.4775  145.18  158.85    0.3039
        280 1.9112 149.98 164.13                              0.3154    1.5221  149.82  163.90    0.3108
                                                                         Tables in English Units 789

TABLE A-12E (Continued )

T  v  u                   h  s          v     u       h          s
                                      ft3/lb
F ft3/lb Btu/lb Btu/lb Btu/lb # R             Btu/lb Btu/lb Btu/lb # R
                                     0.6778
      p  60 lbf/in.2                 0.6814   p  70 lbf/in.2
      (Tsat  49.89F)                 0.7239   (Tsat  58.35F)
                                     0.7640
Sat. 0.7887 99.96 108.72     0.2183  0.8023   101.05 109.83      0.2179
 60 0.8135 102.03 111.06     0.2229  0.8393   101.40 110.23      0.2186
 80 0.8604 106.11 115.66     0.2316  0.8752   105.58 114.96      0.2276
                                     0.9103
100 0.9051 110.21 120.26     0.2399  0.9446   109.76 119.66      0.2361
120 0.9482 114.35 124.88     0.2480  0.9784   113.96 124.36      0.2444
140 0.9900 118.54 129.53     0.2559  1.0118   118.20 129.07      0.2524
                                     1.0448
160 1.0308 122.79 134.23     0.2636  1.0774   122.49 133.82      0.2601
180 1.0707 127.10 138.98     0.2712  1.1098   126.83 138.62      0.2678
200 1.1100 131.47 143.79     0.2786           131.23 143.46      0.2752

220 1.1488 135.91 148.66     0.2859           135.69 148.36      0.2825
240 1.1871 140.42 153.60     0.2930           140.22 153.33      0.2897
260 1.2251 145.00 158.60     0.3001           144.82 158.35      0.2968

280 1.2627 149.65 163.67     0.3070           149.48 163.44      0.3038                               R-134a
300 1.3001 154.38 168.81     0.3139           154.22 168.60      0.3107

      p  80 lbf/in.2                             p  90 lbf/in.2
      (Tsat  65.93F)                            (Tsat  72.83F)

Sat. 0.5938 102.02 110.81    0.2175  0.5278   102.89 111.68      0.2172
 80 0.6211 105.03 114.23     0.2239  0.5408   104.46 113.47      0.2205
                             0.2327  0.5751   108.82 118.39      0.2295
100 0.6579 109.30 119.04
                                     0.6073   113.15 123.27      0.2380
120 0.6927 113.56 123.82     0.2411  0.6380   117.50 128.12      0.2463
140 0.7261 117.85 128.60     0.2492  0.6675   121.87 132.98      0.2542
160 0.7584 122.18 133.41     0.2570
                                     0.6961   126.28 137.87      0.2620
180 0.7898 126.55 138.25     0.2647  0.7239   130.73 142.79      0.2696
200 0.8205 130.98 143.13     0.2722  0.7512   135.25 147.76      0.2770
220 0.8506 135.47 148.06     0.2796
                                     0.7779   139.82 152.77      0.2843
240 0.8803 140.02 153.05     0.2868  0.8043   144.45 157.84      0.2914
260 0.9095 144.63 158.10     0.2940  0.8303   149.15 162.97      0.2984
280 0.9384 149.32 163.21     0.3010
                                     0.8561   153.91 168.16      0.3054
300 0.9671 154.06 168.38     0.3079  0.8816   158.73 173.42      0.3122
320 0.9955 158.88 173.62     0.3147

      p  100 lbf/in.2                           p  120 lbf/in.2
      (Tsat  79.17F)                            (Tsat  90.54F)

Sat. 0.4747 103.68 112.46    0.2169  0.3941   105.06 113.82      0.2165
 80 0.4761 103.87 112.68     0.2173
                             0.2265  0.4080   107.26  116.32     0.2210
100 0.5086 108.32 117.73
                                     0.4355   111.84  121.52     0.2301
120 0.5388 112.73 122.70     0.2352  0.4610   116.37  126.61     0.2387
140 0.5674 117.13 127.63     0.2436  0.4852   120.89  131.66     0.2470
160 0.5947 121.55 132.55     0.2517
                                     0.5082   125.42  136.70     0.2550
180 0.6210 125.99 137.49     0.2595  0.5305   129.97  141.75     0.2628
200 0.6466 130.48 142.45     0.2671  0.5520   134.56  146.82     0.2704
220 0.6716 135.02 147.45     0.2746
                                     0.5731   139.20  151.92     0.2778
240 0.6960 139.61 152.49     0.2819  0.5937   143.89  157.07     0.2850
260 0.7201 144.26 157.59     0.2891  0.6140   148.63  162.26     0.2921
280 0.7438 148.98 162.74     0.2962
                                     0.6339   153.43  167.51     0.2991
300 0.7672 153.75 167.95     0.3031  0.6537   158.29  172.81     0.3060
320 0.7904 158.59 173.21     0.3099
        790 Tables in English Units

        TABLE A-12E (Continued )

                                     T  v  u  h             s              v     u       h          s
                                                                         ft3/lb
                                     F ft3/lb Btu/lb Btu/lb Btu/lb # R           Btu/lb Btu/lb Btu/lb # R
                                                                        0.2916
                                           p  140 lbf/in.2              0.3044   p  160 lbf/in.2
                                           (Tsat  100.56F)              0.3269   (Tsat  109.55F)
                                                                        0.3474
        Sat. 0.3358 106.25 114.95                           0.2161      0.3666   107.28 115.91      0.2157
        120 0.3610 110.90 120.25                            0.2254      0.3849   109.88 118.89      0.2209
        140 0.3846 115.58 125.54                            0.2344      0.4023   114.73 124.41      0.2303
                                                                        0.4192
        160 0.4066 120.21 130.74                            0.2429      0.4356   119.49 129.78      0.2391
        180 0.4274 124.82 135.89                            0.2511      0.4516   124.20 135.06      0.2475
        200 0.4474 129.44 141.03                            0.2590      0.4672   128.90 140.29      0.2555
                                                                        0.4826
        220 0.4666 134.09 146.18                            0.2667      0.4978   133.61 145.52      0.2633
        240 0.4852 138.77 151.34                            0.2742      0.5128   138.34 150.75      0.2709
        260 0.5034 143.50 156.54                            0.2815               143.11 156.00      0.2783

        280 0.5212 148.28 161.78                            0.2887               147.92 161.29      0.2856
        300 0.5387 153.11 167.06                            0.2957               152.78 166.61      0.2927
        320 0.5559 157.99 172.39                            0.3026               157.69 171.98      0.2996

R-134a  340 0.5730 162.93 177.78                            0.3094               162.65 177.39      0.3065
        360 0.5898 167.93 183.21                            0.3162               167.67 182.85      0.3132

                                           p  180 lbf/in.2                         p  200 lbf/in.2
                                           (Tsat  117.74F)                        (Tsat  125.28F)

        Sat. 0.2569 108.18 116.74                           0.2154      0.2288   108.98 117.44      0.2151
        120 0.2595 108.77 117.41                            0.2166
        140 0.2814 113.83 123.21                            0.2264      0.2446   112.87  121.92     0.2226

        160 0.3011 118.74 128.77                            0.2355      0.2636   117.94  127.70     0.2321
        180 0.3191 123.56 134.19                            0.2441      0.2809   122.88  133.28     0.2410
        200 0.3361 128.34 139.53                            0.2524      0.2970   127.76  138.75     0.2494

        220 0.3523 133.11 144.84                            0.2603      0.3121   132.60  144.15     0.2575
        240 0.3678 137.90 150.15                            0.2680      0.3266   137.44  149.53     0.2653
        260 0.3828 142.71 155.46                            0.2755      0.3405   142.30  154.90     0.2728

        280 0.3974 147.55 160.79                            0.2828      0.3540   147.18  160.28     0.2802
        300 0.4116 152.44 166.15                            0.2899      0.3671   152.10  165.69     0.2874
        320 0.4256 157.38 171.55                            0.2969      0.3799   157.07  171.13     0.2945

        340 0.4393 162.36 177.00                            0.3038      0.3926   162.07  176.60     0.3014
        360 0.4529 167.40 182.49                            0.3106      0.4050   167.13  182.12     0.3082

                                           p  300 lbf/in.2                         p  400 lbf/in.2
                                           (Tsat  156.17F)                        (Tsat  179.95F)

        Sat. 0.1424 111.72 119.62                           0.2132      0.0965   112.77 119.91      0.2102
        160 0.1462 112.95 121.07                            0.2155
        180 0.1633 118.93 128.00                            0.2265      0.0965   112.79  119.93     0.2102

        200 0.1777 124.47 134.34                            0.2363      0.1143   120.14  128.60     0.2235
        220 0.1905 129.79 140.36                            0.2453      0.1275   126.35  135.79     0.2343
        240 0.2021 134.99 146.21                            0.2537      0.1386   132.12  142.38     0.2438

        260 0.2130 140.12 151.95                            0.2618      0.1484   137.65  148.64     0.2527
        280 0.2234 145.23 157.63                            0.2696      0.1575   143.06  154.72     0.2610
        300 0.2333 150.33 163.28                            0.2772      0.1660   148.39  160.67     0.2689

        320 0.2428 155.44 168.92                            0.2845      0.1740   153.69  166.57     0.2766
        340 0.2521 160.57 174.56                            0.2916      0.1816   158.97  172.42     0.2840
        360 0.2611 165.74 180.23                            0.2986      0.1890   164.26  178.26     0.2912

        380 0.2699 170.94 185.92                            0.3055      0.1962   169.57  184.09     0.2983
        400 0.2786 176.18 191.64                            0.3122      0.2032   174.90  189.94     0.3051
                                                                                       Tables in English Units 791

TABLE A-13E Properties of Saturated Ammonia (Liquid­Vapor): Temperature Table

                 Specific Volume   Internal Energy            Enthalpy                  Entropy
                       ft3/lb           Btu/lb                 Btu/lb                  Btu/lb # R

Temp.  Press.     Sat.     Sat.     Sat.    Sat.     Sat.     Evap.             Sat.    Sat.      Sat.                               Temp.
  F    lbf/in.2  Liquid   Vapor    Liquid  Vapor    Liquid     hfg             Vapor   Liquid    Vapor                                 F

 60      5.548     vf       vg       uf      ug       hf                         hg       sf       sg                                60
 55      6.536                                                                                                                       55
 50      7.664   0.02278  44.7537  21.005  543.61   20.97     610.56           589.58  0.0512    1.4765                              50
 45      8.949   0.02288  38.3991  15.765  545.11   15.73     607.31           591.58  0.0381    1.4627                              45
 40    10.405    0.02299  33.0880  10.525  546.59   10.49     604.04           593.54  0.0253    1.4492                              40
                 0.02310  28.6284          548.04             600.72           595.48  0.0126    1.4361
                 0.02322  24.8672   5.295  549.46    5.25     597.37           597.37            1.4235
                                    0.045                                                0.0000
                                                        0.00

35 12.049 0.02333 21.6812          5.20 550.86      5.26 593.98 599.24 0.0124 1.4111 35

30 13.899 0.02345 18.9715 10.46 552.24 10.52 590.54 601.06 0.0247 1.3992 30

25 15.972 0.02357 16.6577 15.73 553.59 15.80 587.05 602.85 0.0369 1.3875 25

20 18.290 0.02369 14.6744 21.01 554.91 21.09 583.51 604.61 0.0490 1.3762 20

15 20.871 0.02381 12.9682 26.31 556.20 26.40 579.92 606.32 0.0610 1.3652 15

10 23.738 0.02393 11.4951 31.63 557.46 31.73 576.26 607.99 0.0729 1.3544 10

5 26.912 0.02406 10.2190 36.96 558.70 37.08 572.54 609.62 0.0847 1.3440 5

0 30.416 0.02419 9.1100 42.32 559.91 42.45 568.76 611.22 0.0964 1.3338                                                               0

5 34.275 0.02432 8.1430 47.69 561.08 47.85 564.92 612.76 0.1080 1.3238                                                               5

10 38.512 0.02446 7.2974 53.09 562.23 53.27 561.00 614.27 0.1196 1.3141                                                              10

15 43.153 0.02460 6.5556 58.52 563.34 58.72 557.01 615.73 0.1311 1.3046                                                              15

20 48.224 0.02474 5.9032 63.97 564.43 64.19 552.95 617.14 0.1425 1.2953                                                              20     Ammonia

25 53.752 0.02488 5.3278 69.43 565.48 69.68 548.82 618.51 0.1539 1.2862                                                              25

30 59.765 0.02503 4.8188 74.93 566.49 75.20 544.62 619.82 0.1651 1.2774                                                              30

35 66.291 0.02517 4.3675 80.44 567.48 80.75 540.34 621.09 0.1764 1.2687                                                              35

40 73.359 0.02533 3.9664 85.98 568.42 86.33 535.97 622.30 0.1875 1.2602                                                              40

45 81.000 0.02548 3.6090 91.55 569.33 91.93 531.54 623.46 0.1986 1.2518                                                              45

50 89.242 0.02564 3.2897 97.13 570.21 97.55 527.02 624.57 0.2096 1.2436                                                              50

55 98.118 0.02581 3.0040 102.73 571.04 103.20 522.42 625.62 0.2205 1.2356                                                            55

60 107.66 0.02597 2.7476 108.35 571.83 108.87 517.74 626.61 0.2314 1.2277                                                            60

65 117.90 0.02614 2.5171 113.99 572.59 114.56 512.97 627.54 0.2422 1.2199                                                            65

70 128.87 0.02632 2.3095 119.65 573.29 120.28 508.12 628.40 0.2530 1.2123                                                            70

75 140.60 0.02650 2.1220 125.33 573.95 126.02 503.18 629.20 0.2636 1.2048                                                            75

80 153.13 0.02668 1.9524 131.02 574.57 131.78 498.15 629.93 0.2742 1.1973                                                            80

85 166.50 0.02687 1.7988 136.73 575.13 137.56 493.03 630.59 0.2848 1.1900                                                            85

90 180.73 0.02707 1.6593 142.46 575.65 143.37 487.81 631.18 0.2953 1.1827                                                            90

 95 195.87       0.02727  1.5324   148.21  576.10   149.20    482.49           631.68  0.3057 1.1756                                 95
100 211.96       0.02747  1.4168   153.98  576.51   155.05    477.06           632.11
105 229.02       0.02768  1.3113   159.76  576.85   160.94    471.52           632.46  0.3161 1.1685 100
110 247.10       0.02790  1.2149   165.58  577.13   166.85    465.86           632.71
115 266.24       0.02813  1.1266   171.41  577.34   172.80    460.08           632.88  0.3264 1.1614 105
120 286.47       0.02836  1.0456   177.28  577.48   178.79    454.16           632.95
                                                                                       0.3366 1.1544 110

                                                                                       0.3469 1.1475 115

                                                                                       0.3570 1.1405 120

Source: Tables A-13E through A-15E are calculated based on equations from L. Haar and J. S. Gallagher, "Thermodynamic Properties of
Ammonia," J. Phys. Chem. Reference Data, Vol. 7, 1978, pp. 635­792.
         792 Tables in English Units

         TABLE A-14E Properties of Saturated Ammonia (Liquid­Vapor): Pressure Table

                          Specific Volume     Internal Energy          Enthalpy               Entropy
                                ft3/lb             Btu/lb               Btu/lb               Btu/lb # R

         Press.    Temp.   Sat.        Sat.    Sat.    Sat.     Sat.   Evap.          Sat.    Sat.      Sat.   Press.
         lbf/in.2     F   Liquid      Vapor   Liquid  Vapor    Liquid   hfg          Vapor   Liquid    Vapor   lbf/in.2

              5    63.10    vf          vg      uf      ug       hf                    hg       sf       sg        5
              6    57.63                                                                                           6
              7    52.86  0.02271     49.320  24.24   542.67   24.22   612.56        588.33  0.0593    1.4853      7
              8    48.63  0.02283     41.594  18.51   544.32   18.49   609.02        590.54  0.0450    1.4699      8
              9    44.81  0.02293     36.014  13.52   545.74   13.49   605.92        592.42  0.0326    1.4569      9
                          0.02302     31.790          546.98           603.13        594.08  0.0218    1.4456
                          0.02311     28.477   9.09   548.09    9.06   600.60        595.55  0.0121    1.4357    10
                                               5.09             5.05                                             12
                                                                                                                 14
         10 41.33 0.02319 25.807              1.44    549.09   1.40    598.27        596.87  0.0033    1.4268    16
         12 35.14 0.02333 21.764                5.06  550.82     5.11  594.08        599.18    0.0121  1.4115    18
         14 29.74 0.02345 18.843               10.73  552.31    10.79  590.36        601.16    0.0254  1.3986
         16 24.94 0.02357 16.631               15.80  553.60    15.87  587.01        602.88    0.0371  1.3874    20
         18 20.60 0.02367 14.896               20.38  554.75    20.46  583.94        604.40    0.0476  1.3775    25
                                                                                                                 30
         20 16.63 0.02377 13.497              24.58   555.78   24.67   581.10        605.76  0.0571    1.3687    35
                                              33.81   557.97   33.92   574.75        608.67  0.0777    1.3501    40
         25        7.95 0.02399 10.950        41.71   559.77   41.84   569.20        611.04  0.0951    1.3349
                                              48.65   561.29   48.81   564.22        613.03  0.1101    1.3221    45
         30        0.57 0.02418 9.229         54.89   562.60   55.07   559.69        614.76  0.1234    1.3109    50
                                                                                                                 55
         35        5.89 0.02435 7.984                                                                            60
                                                                                                                 65
         40        11.65 0.02450 7.041
                                                                                                                 70
         45        16.87 0.02465 6.302        60.56 563.75 60.76 555.50 616.26               0.1354    1.3011    75
                                                                                             0.1463    1.2923    80
Ammonia  50        21.65 0.02478 5.705        65.77 564.78 66.00 551.59 617.60               0.1563    1.2843    85
                                                                                             0.1656    1.2770    90
         55        26.07 0.02491 5.213        70.61 565.70 70.86 547.93 618.79               0.1742    1.2703
                                                                                                                100
         60        30.19 0.02503 4.801        75.13 566.53 75.41 544.46 619.87                                  110
                                                                                                                120
         65        34.04 0.02515 4.450        79.39 567.29 79.69 541.16 620.85                                  130
                                                                                                                140
         70        37.67 0.02526 4.1473 83.40 567.99 83.73 538.01 621.74                     0.1823    1.2641   150
                                                                                             0.1900    1.2583
         75        41.11 0.02536 3.8837 87.21 568.63 87.57 535.00 622.56                     0.1972    1.2529   175
                                                                                             0.2040    1.2478   200
         80        44.37 0.02546 3.6520 90.84 569.22 91.22 532.10 623.32                     0.2106    1.2429   225
                                                                                                                250
         85        47.47 0.02556 3.4466 94.30 569.77 94.71 529.31 624.02                                        275
                                                                                                                300
         90        50.44 0.02566 3.2632 97.62 570.28 98.05 526.62 624.66

         100       56.01 0.02584 2.9497 103.87 571.21 104.35 521.48 625.82                   0.2227    1.2340
                                                                                             0.2340    1.2259
         110       61.17 0.02601 2.6913 109.68 572.01 110.20 516.63 626.83                   0.2443    1.2184
                                                                                             0.2540    1.2115
         120       65.98 0.02618 2.4745 115.11 572.73 115.69 512.02 627.71                   0.2631    1.2051
                                                                                             0.2717    1.1991
         130       70.50 0.02634 2.2899 120.21 573.36 120.85 507.64 628.48

         140       74.75 0.02649 2.1309 125.04 573.92 125.73 503.43 629.16

         150       78.78 0.02664 1.9923 129.63 574.42 130.37 499.39 629.76

         175       88.02 0.02699 1.7128 140.19 575.45 141.07 489.89 630.95                   0.2911    1.1856
                                                                                             0.3084    1.1737
         200       96.31 0.02732 1.5010 149.72 576.21 150.73 481.07 631.80                   0.3240    1.1630
                                                                                             0.3382    1.1533
         225 103.85 0.02764 1.3348 158.43 576.77 159.58 472.80 632.38                        0.3513    1.1444
                                                                                             0.3635    1.1361
         250 110.78 0.02794 1.2007 166.48 577.16 167.77 464.97 632.74

         275 117.20 0.02823 1.0901 173.99 577.41 175.43 457.49 632.92

         300 123.20 0.02851 0.9974 181.05 577.54 182.63 450.31 632.94
                                                                                       Tables in English Units 793

TABLE A-15E Properties of Superheated Ammonia Vapor

T  v          u       h         s                      v     u       h         s
                                                     ft3/lb
F ft3/lb Btu/lb Btu/lb Btu/lb # R                            Btu/lb Btu/lb Btu/lb # R

                p  6 lbf/in.2                                  p  8 lbf/in.2
              (Tsat  57.63F)                                 (Tsat  48.63F)

Sat. 41.594   544.32  590.54    1.4699  31.790               546.98 594.08 1.4456
50 42.435     547.22  594.37    1.4793
40 43.533     551.03  599.40    1.4915  32.511               550.32  598.49    1.4562
                                        33.342
30 44.627     554.84  604.42    1.5033  34.169               554.19  603.58    1.4682
20 45.715     558.66  609.45    1.5149  34.992               558.06  608.68    1.4799
10 46.800     562.47  614.47    1.5261                       561.93  613.76    1.4914

 0 47.882     566.29 619.49     1.5372  35.811               565.79  618.84    1.5025
10 48.960     570.12 624.51     1.5480  36.627               569.66  623.91    1.5135
20 50.035     573.95 629.54     1.5586  37.440               573.52  628.99    1.5241

30 51.108     577.78  634.57    1.5690  38.250               577.40  634.06    1.5346
40 52.179     581.63  639.60    1.5791  39.058               581.27  639.13    1.5449
50 53.247     585.49  644.64    1.5891  39.865               585.16  644.21    1.5549
60 54.314     589.35  649.70    1.5990  40.669               589.05  649.29    1.5648

                p  10 lbf/in.2                                 p  12 lbf/in.2
              (Tsat  41.33F)                                 (Tsat  35.14F)

Sat. 25.807   549.09 596.87     1.4268  21.764               550.82 599.18     1.4115
40 25.897     549.61 597.56     1.4284
30 26.571     553.54 602.74     1.4406  22.056               552.87  601.88    1.4178                               Ammonia

20 27.241     557.46 607.90     1.4525  22.621               556.85  607.12    1.4298
10 27.906     561.37 613.05     1.4641  23.182               560.82  612.33    1.4416
              565.29 618.19     1.4754  23.739               564.78  617.53    1.4530
    0 28.568
              569.19 623.31     1.4864  24.293               568.73  622.71    1.4642
  10 29.227   573.10 628.43     1.4972  24.843               572.67  627.88    1.4750
  20 29.882   577.01 633.55     1.5078  25.392               576.61  633.03    1.4857
  30 30.535
              580.91  638.66    1.5181  25.937               580.55  638.19    1.4961
  40 31.186   584.82  643.77    1.5282  26.481               584.49  643.33    1.5063
  50 31.835   588.74  648.89    1.5382  27.023               588.43  648.48    1.5163
  60 32.482   592.66  654.01    1.5479  27.564               592.38  653.63    1.5261
  70 33.127

                p  14 lbf/in.2                                 p  16 lbf/in.2
              (Tsat  29.74F)                                 (Tsat  24.94F)

Sat. 18.843   552.31 601.16     1.3986  16.631               553.60 602.88     1.3874
20 19.321     556.24 606.33     1.4105  16.845               555.62 605.53     1.3935
10 19.807     560.26 611.61     1.4223  17.275               559.69 610.88     1.4055

    0 20.289  564.27 616.86     1.4339  17.701               563.75 616.19     1.4172
  10 20.768   568.26 622.10     1.4452  18.124               567.79 621.48     1.4286
  20 21.244   572.24 627.31     1.4562  18.544               571.81 626.75     1.4397

  30 21.717   576.22 632.52     1.4669  18.961               575.82 632.00     1.4505
  40 22.188   580.19 637.71     1.4774  19.376               579.82 637.23     1.4611
  50 22.657   584.16 642.89     1.4877  19.789               583.82 642.45     1.4714

  60 23.124   588.12  648.07    1.4977  20.200               587.81  647.66    1.4815
  70 23.590   592.09  653.25    1.5076  20.609               591.80  652.86    1.4915
  80 24.054   596.07  658.42    1.5173  21.017               595.80  658.07    1.5012
  90 24.517   600.04  663.60    1.5268  21.424               599.80  663.27    1.5107
         794 Tables in English Units

         TABLE A-15E (Continued )

                                      T  v        u       h                    s           v    u       h         s
                                                                                        ft3/lb
                                      F  ft3/lb   Btu/lb Btu/lb Btu/lb # R                      Btu/lb Btu/lb Btu/lb # R
                                                                                       13.497
                                                    p  18 lbf/in.2                                p  20 lbf/in.2
                                                  (Tsat  20.60F)                                (Tsat  16.63F)

         Sat. 14.896                              554.75 604.40                1.3775           555.78 605.76 1.3687
         20 14.919                                555.00 604.72                1.3783
         10 15.306                                559.13 610.14                1.3905  13.730   558.55  609.40    1.3769

             0 15.688                             563.23 615.52                1.4023  14.078   562.70  614.84    1.3888
           10 16.068                              567.31 620.87                1.4138  14.422   566.83  620.24    1.4005
           20 16.444                              571.37 626.18                1.4250  14.764   570.94  625.61    1.4118

           30 16.818                              575.42 631.47                1.4359  15.103   575.02  630.95    1.4228
           40 17.189                              579.46 636.75                1.4466  15.439   579.09  636.26    1.4335
           50 17.558                              583.48 642.00                1.4570  15.773   583.14  641.55    1.4440

           60 17.925                              587.50  647.25               1.4672  16.105   587.19  646.83    1.4543
           70 18.291                              591.52  652.48               1.4772  16.436   591.23  652.10    1.4643
           80 18.655                              595.53  657.71               1.4869  16.765   595.26  657.35    1.4741
           90 19.018                              599.55  662.94               1.4965  17.094   599.30  662.60    1.4838

                                                   p  30 lbf/in.2                                 p  40 lbf/in.2
                                                  (Tsat  0.57F)                                  (Tsat  11.65F)

                                      Sat. 9.2286 559.77 611.04                1.3349  7.0414   562.60 614.76     1.3109
                                         0 9.2425 560.02 611.36                1.3356
Ammonia                                10 9.4834 564.38 617.07                 1.3479

                                      20 9.7209 568.70 622.70                  1.3598  7.1965   566.39  619.69    1.3213
                                      30 9.9554 572.97 628.28                  1.3713  7.3795   570.86  625.52    1.3333
                                      40 10.187 577.21 633.80                  1.3824  7.5597   575.28  631.28    1.3450

                                      50 10.417   581.42 639.28                1.3933  7.7376   579.65  636.96    1.3562
                                      60 10.645   585.60 644.73                1.4039  7.9134   583.97  642.58    1.3672
                                      70 10.871   589.76 650.15                1.4142  8.0874   588.26  648.16    1.3778

                                       80 11.096  593.90  655.54               1.4243  8.2598   592.52  653.69    1.3881
                                       90 11.319  598.04  660.91               1.4342  8.4308   596.75  659.20    1.3982
                                      100 11.541  602.16  666.27               1.4438  8.6006   600.97  664.67    1.4081
                                      110 11.762  606.28  671.62               1.4533  8.7694   605.17  670.12    1.4178

                                                               p  50 lbf/in.2                   p  60 lbf/in.2
                                                              (Tsat  21.65F)                    (Tsat  30.19F)

                                      Sat. 5.7049 564.78 617.60                1.2923  4.8009   566.53 619.87     1.2770
                                       40 5.9815 573.30 628.68                 1.3149  4.9278   571.25 626.00     1.2894
                                       60 6.2733 582.31 640.39                 1.3379  5.1788   580.60 638.14     1.3133

                                       80 6.5574 591.10 651.82                 1.3595  5.4218   589.66 649.90     1.3355
                                      100 6.8358 599.75 663.04                 1.3799  5.6587   598.52 661.39     1.3564
                                      120 7.1097 608.30 674.13                 1.3993  5.8910   607.23 672.68     1.3762

                                      140 7.3802 616.80 685.13                 1.4180  6.1198   615.86 683.85     1.3951
                                      160 7.6480 625.28 696.09                 1.4360  6.3458   624.44 694.95     1.4133
                                      200 8.1776 642.27 717.99                 1.4702  6.7916   641.59 717.05     1.4479

                                      240 8.7016 659.44 740.00                 1.5026  7.2318   658.87  739.21    1.4805
                                      280 9.2218 676.88 762.26                 1.5336  7.6679   676.38  761.58    1.5116
                                      320 9.7391 694.65 784.82                 1.5633  8.1013   694.21  784.22    1.5414
                                      360 10.254 712.79 807.73                 1.5919  8.5325   712.40  807.20    1.5702
                                                                       Tables in English Units 795

TABLE A-15E (Continued)

T  v  u                  h  s         v     u       h          s
                                    ft3/lb
F ft3/lb Btu/lb Btu/lb Btu/lb # R           Btu/lb Btu/lb Btu/lb # R
                                    3.6520
      p  70 lbf/in.2                        p  80 lbf/in.2
      (Tsat  37.67F)                        (Tsat  44.37F)

Sat. 4.1473 567.99 621.74   1.2641          569.22 623.32 1.2529
 40 4.1739 569.15 623.25    1.2671
 60 4.3962 578.85 635.84    1.2918  3.8084  577.06  633.48     1.2727

 80 4.6100 588.19 647.95    1.3147  4.0006  586.69  645.95     1.2963
100 4.8175 597.26 659.70    1.3361  4.1862  595.98  657.99     1.3182
120 5.0202 606.14 671.22    1.3563  4.3668  605.04  669.73     1.3388

140 5.2193 614.91 682.56    1.3756  4.5436  613.94  681.25     1.3583
160 5.4154 623.60 693.79    1.3940  4.7175  622.74  692.63     1.3770
200 5.8015 640.91 716.11    1.4289  5.0589  640.22  715.16     1.4122

240 6.1818 658.29 738.42    1.4617  5.3942  657.71  737.62     1.4453
280 6.5580 675.89 760.89    1.4929  5.7256  675.39  760.20     1.4767
320 6.9314 693.78 783.62    1.5229  6.0540  693.34  783.02     1.5067

360 7.3026 712.02 806.67    1.5517  6.3802  711.63  806.15     1.5357
400 7.6721 730.63 830.08    1.5796  6.7047  730.29  829.61     1.5636

      p  90 lbf/in.2                        p  100 lbf/in.2
      (Tsat  50.44F)                        (Tsat  56.01F)

Sat. 3.2632 570.28 624.66   1.2429  2.9497  571.21 625.82      1.2340                               Ammonia
 60 3.3504 575.22 631.05    1.2553  2.9832  573.32 628.56      1.2393
 80 3.5261 585.15 643.91    1.2796  3.1460  583.58 641.83      1.2644

100 3.6948 594.68 656.26    1.3021  3.3014  593.35 654.49      1.2874
120 3.8584 603.92 668.22    1.3231  3.4513  602.79 666.70      1.3088
140 4.0180 612.97 679.93    1.3430  3.5972  611.98 678.59      1.3290

160 4.1746 621.88 691.45    1.3619  3.7401  621.01 690.27      1.3481
200 4.4812 639.52 714.20    1.3974  4.0189  638.82 713.24      1.3841
240 4.7817 657.13 736.82    1.4307  4.2916  656.54 736.01      1.4176

280 5.0781 674.89 759.52    1.4623  4.5600  674.39  758.82     1.4493
320 5.3715 692.90 782.42    1.4924  4.8255  692.47  781.82     1.4796
360 5.6628 711.24 805.62    1.5214  5.0888  710.86  805.09     1.5087
400 5.9522 729.95 829.14    1.5495  5.3503  729.60  828.68     1.5368

      p  110 lbf/in.2                         p  120 lbf/in.2
      (Tsat  61.17F)                         (Tsat  65.98F)

Sat. 2.6913 572.01 626.83   1.2259  2.4745  572.73 627.71      1.2184
 80 2.8344 581.97 639.71    1.2502  2.5744  580.33 637.53      1.2369
100 2.9791 592.00 652.69    1.2738  2.7102  590.63 650.85      1.2611

120 3.1181 601.63 665.14    1.2957  2.8401  600.46 663.57      1.2834
140 3.2528 610.98 677.24    1.3162  2.9657  609.97 675.86      1.3043
160 3.3844 620.13 689.07    1.3356  3.0879  619.24 687.86      1.3240

200 3.6406 638.11 712.27    1.3719  3.3254  637.40 711.29      1.3606
240 3.8905 655.96 735.20    1.4056  3.5563  655.36 734.39      1.3946
280 4.1362 673.88 758.13    1.4375  3.7829  673.37 757.43      1.4266

320 4.3788 692.02 781.22    1.4679  4.0065  691.58 780.61      1.4572
360 4.6192 710.47 804.56    1.4971  4.2278  710.08 804.02      1.4864
400 4.8578 729.26 828.21    1.5252  4.4473  728.92 827.74      1.5147
         796 Tables in English Units

         TABLE A-15E (Continued)

                                      T  v  u  h                 s         v     u       h          s
                                                                         ft3/lb
                                      F ft3/lb Btu/lb Btu/lb Btu/lb # R          Btu/lb Btu/lb Btu/lb # R
                                                                         2.1309
                                            p  130 lbf/in.2              2.1633  p  140 lbf/in.2
                                            (Tsat  70.50F)               2.2868  (Tsat  74.75F)
                                                                         2.4004
                                      Sat. 2.2899 573.36 628.48  1.2115  2.5140  573.92 629.16      1.2051
                                       80 2.3539 578.64 635.30   1.2243  2.6204  576.80 632.89      1.2119
                                      100 2.4824 589.23 648.98   1.2492  2.7268  587.79 647.08      1.2379
                                                                         2.8289
                                      120 2.6048 599.27 661.97   1.2720  3.0304  597.85 660.08      1.2604
                                      140 2.7226 608.94 674.48   1.2932  3.2274  607.90 673.07      1.2828
                                      160 2.8370 618.34 686.64   1.3132  3.4212  617.34 685.27      1.3025
                                                                         3.6126
                                      180 2.9488 627.57 698.55   1.3321  3.8022  626.77 697.46      1.3222
                                      200 3.0585 636.69 710.31   1.3502          635.93 709.27      1.3401
                                      240 3.2734 654.77 733.57   1.3844          654.17 732.73      1.3747

                                      280 3.4840 672.87 756.73   1.4166          672.38  756.04     1.4071
                                      320 3.6915 691.14 780.00   1.4472          690.73  779.42     1.4379
                                      360 3.8966 709.69 803.49   1.4766          709.34  802.99     1.4674
                                      400 4.1000 728.57 827.27   1.5049          728.27  826.84     1.4958

                                            p  150 lbf/in.2                        p  200 lbf/in.2
                                            (Tsat  78.78F)                        (Tsat  96.31F)

Ammonia                               Sat. 1.9923 574.42 629.76  1.1991  1.5010  576.21 631.80      1.1737
                                      100 2.1170 586.33 645.13   1.2271  1.5190  578.52 634.77      1.1790
                                      140 2.3332 606.84 671.65   1.2729  1.6984  601.34 664.24      1.2299

                                      180 2.5343 625.95 696.35   1.3128  1.8599  621.77 690.65      1.2726
                                      220 2.7268 644.43 720.17   1.3489  2.0114  641.07 715.57      1.3104
                                      260 2.9137 662.70 743.63   1.3825  2.1569  659.90 739.78      1.3450

                                      300 3.0968 681.02 767.04   1.4141  2.2984  678.62 763.74      1.3774
                                      340 3.2773 699.54 790.57   1.4443  2.4371  697.44 787.70      1.4081
                                      380 3.4558 718.35 814.34   1.4733  2.5736  716.50 811.81      1.4375

                                      420 3.6325 737.50 838.39   1.5013  2.7085  735.86 836.17      1.4659
                                      460 3.8079 757.01 862.78   1.5284  2.8420  755.57 860.82      1.4933
                                      500 3.9821 776.91 887.51   1.5548  2.9742  775.65 885.80      1.5199

                                      540 4.1553 797.19 912.60   1.5804  3.1054  796.10 911.11      1.5457
                                      580 4.3275 817.85 938.05   1.6053  3.2357  816.94 936.77      1.5709

                                            p  250 lbf/in.2                      p  300 lbf/in.2
                                            (Tsat  110.78F)                      (Tsat  123.20F)

                                      Sat. 1.2007 577.16 632.74  1.1533  0.9974  577.54 632.94      1.1361
                                      140 1.3150 595.40 656.28   1.1936  1.0568  588.94 647.65      1.1610
                                      180 1.4539 617.38 684.69   1.2395  1.1822  612.75 678.42      1.2107

                                      220 1.5816 637.61 710.82   1.2791  1.2944  634.01 705.91      1.2524
                                      260 1.7025 657.03 735.85   1.3149  1.3992  654.09 731.82      1.2895
                                      300 1.8191 676.17 760.39   1.3481  1.4994  673.69 756.98      1.3235

                                      340 1.9328 695.32 784.79   1.3794  1.5965  693.16 781.85      1.3554
                                      380 2.0443 714.63 809.27   1.4093  1.6913  712.74 806.70      1.3857
                                      420 2.1540 734.22 833.93   1.4380  1.7843  732.55 831.67      1.4148

                                      460 2.2624 754.12 858.85   1.4657  1.8759  752.66  856.87     1.4428
                                      500 2.3695 774.38 884.07   1.4925  1.9663  773.10  882.33     1.4699
                                      540 2.4755 795.01 909.61   1.5186  2.0556  793.90  908.09     1.4962
                                      580 2.5807 816.01 935.47   1.5440  2.1440  815.07  934.17     1.5218
                                                                                      Tables in English Units 797

TABLE A-16E Properties of Saturated Propane (Liquid­Vapor): Temperature Table

                Specific Volume   Internal Energy          Enthalpy                    Entropy
                      ft3/lb           Btu/lb               Btu/lb                    Btu/lb # R

Temp.  Press.    Sat.     Sat.     Sat.    Sat.     Sat.   Evap.                Sat.   Sat.    Sat.  Temp.
  F    lbf/in2  Liquid   Vapor    Liquid  Vapor    Liquid   hfg                Vapor  Liquid  Vapor     F

140     0.6053    vf       vg       uf      ug       hf                          hg      sf     sg   140
120     1.394                                                                                        120
100     2.888   0.02505  128.00   51.33   139.22   51.33   204.9               153.6  0.139   0.501  100
        5.485   0.02551   58.88   41.44   143.95   41.43   200.6               159.1  0.109   0.481
 80     9.688   0.02601   29.93   31.34   148.80   31.33   196.1               164.8  0.080   0.465   80
 60             0.02653   16.52   21.16   153.73   21.13   191.6               170.5  0.053   0.452   60
                0.02708     9.75  10.73   158.74   10.68   186.9               176.2  0.026   0.441
                                                                                                      40
40     16.1     0.02767 6.08      0.08    163.80    0.00   181.9               181.9  0.000   0.433   20
                0.02831 3.98       10.81  168.88   10.94   176.6               187.6  0.025   0.427
20     25.4     0.02901 2.70       21.98  174.01   22.19   171.0               193.2  0.050   0.422       0
                0.02939 2.25       27.69  176.61   27.94   168.0               196.0  0.063   0.420      10
0      38.4     0.02978 1.89       33.47  179.15   33.78   164.9               198.7  0.074   0.418      20

10     46.5                                                                                              30
                                                                                                         40
20     55.8                                                                                              50
                                                                                                         60
30     66.5     0.03020  1.598    39.34   181.71   39.71   161.7               201.4  0.087   0.417      70
                0.03063  1.359    45.30   184.30   45.75   158.3               204.1  0.099   0.415
40     78.6     0.03110  1.161    51.36   186.74   51.89   154.7               206.6  0.111   0.414      80
                0.03160  0.9969   57.53   189.30   58.16   151.0               209.2  0.123   0.413      90
50     92.3     0.03213  0.8593   63.81   191.71   64.55   147.0               211.6  0.135   0.412    100
                                                                                                       110
60 107.7                                                                                               120

70 124.9                                                                                               130
                                                                                                       140
 80 144.0       0.03270  0.7433   70.20   194.16   71.07   142.9               214.0  0.147   0.411    150
 90 165.2       0.03332  0.6447   76.72   196.46   77.74   138.4               216.2  0.159   0.410    160
100 188.6       0.03399  0.5605   83.38   198.71   84.56   133.7               218.3  0.171   0.410    170
110 214.3       0.03473  0.4881   90.19   200.91   91.56   128.7               220.3  0.183   0.409
120 242.5       0.03555  0.4254   97.16   202.98   98.76   123.3               222.1  0.195   0.408    180
                                                                                                       190
130 273.3       0.03646  0.3707   104.33  204.92   106.17  117.5               223.7  0.207   0.406    200         Propane
140 306.9       0.03749  0.3228   111.70  206.64   113.83  111.1               225.0  0.220   0.405    206.1
150 343.5       0.03867  0.2804   119.33  208.05   121.79  104.1               225.9  0.233   0.403
160 383.3       0.04006  0.2426   127.27  209.16   130.11   96.3               226.4  0.246   0.401
170 426.5       0.04176  0.2085   135.60  209.81   138.90   87.4               226.3  0.259   0.398

180    473.4    0.04392  0.1771   144.50  209.76   148.35  76.9 225.3                 0.273   0.394
190    524.3    0.04696  0.1470   154.38  208.51   158.94  63.8 222.8                 0.289   0.387
200    579.7    0.05246  0.1148   166.65  204.16   172.28  44.2 216.5                 0.309   0.376
206.1  616.1    0.07265  0.07265  186.99  186.99   195.27   0.0 195.27                0.343   0.343
         798 Tables in English Units

         TABLE A-17E Properties of Saturated Propane (Liquid­Vapor): Pressure Table

                         Specific Volume      Internal Energy          Enthalpy                     Entropy
                               ft3/lb              Btu/lb               Btu/lb                     Btu/lb # R

         Press.   Temp.   Sat.         Sat.    Sat.    Sat.     Sat.                 Evap.   Sat.   Sat.     Sat.  Press.
         lbf/in2     F   Liquid       Vapor   Liquid  Vapor    Liquid                 hfg   Vapor  Liquid   Vapor  lbf/in2

            0.75  135.1    vf           vg      uf      ug       hf                           hg      sf      sg      0.75
            1.5   118.1                                                                                               1.5
            3            0.02516      104.8   48.93   140.36   48.93                 203.8  154.9  0.132    0.496     3
            5      98.9  0.02556       54.99  40.44   144.40   40.43                 200.1  159.7  0.106    0.479     5
            7.5    83.0  0.02603       28.9   30.84   149.06   30.83                 196.0  165.1  0.079    0.464     7.5
                   69.3  0.02644       18.00  22.75   152.96   22.73                 192.4  169.6  0.057    0.454
                         0.02682       12.36  15.60   156.40   15.56                 189.1  173.6  0.038    0.446   10
                                                                                                                    20
         10       58.8 0.02711        9.468   10.10 159.04 10.05 186.6                      176.6  0.024    0.441   30
                                                                                            184.6    0.012  0.430   40
         20       30.7 0.02796        4.971   4.93 166.18      5.03 179.5                   189.8    0.035  0.425   50
                                                                                            193.8    0.053  0.422
         30       12.1 0.02858        3.402   15.15 170.93 15.31 174.5                      197.1    0.067  0.419   60
                                                                                                                    70
         40       2.1 0.02909         2.594   23.19 174.60 23.41 170.4                      199.8                   80
                                                                                            202.2                   90
         50       13.9 0.02954        2.099   29.96 177.63 30.23 166.8                      204.3                  100
                                                                                            206.2
         60       24.1 0.02995        1.764   35.86 180.23 36.19 163.6                      207.9  0.079    0.418  120
                                                                                                   0.090    0.416  140
         70       33.0 0.03033        1.520   41.14 182.50 41.53 160.6                      210.9  0.100    0.415  160
                                                                                            213.5  0.109    0.414  180
         80       41.1 0.03068        1.336   45.95 184.57 46.40 157.9                      215.7  0.117    0.414  200
                                                                                            217.6
         90       48.4 0.03102        1.190   50.38 186.36 50.90 155.3                      219.2                  220
                                                                                                                   240
         100      55.1 0.03135        1.073   54.52 188.07 55.10 152.8                      220.7                  260
                                                                                            221.9                  280
         120      67.2 0.03198        0.8945  62.08 191.07 62.79 148.1                      223.0  0.131    0.412  300
                                                                                            223.9  0.144    0.412
         140      78.0 0.03258        0.7650  68.91 193.68 69.75 143.7                      224.7  0.156    0.411  320
                                                                                                   0.166    0.410  340
         160      87.6 0.03317        0.6665  75.17 195.97 76.15 139.5                      225.3  0.176    0.409  360
                                                                                            225.8                  380
         180      96.5 0.03375        0.5890  80.99 197.97 82.12 135.5                      226.2                  400
                                                                                            226.4
         200      104.6 0.03432       0.5261  86.46 199.77 87.73 131.4                      226.5                  450
                                                                                                                   500
         220      112.1 0.03489       0.4741  91.64 201.37 93.06 127.6                      225.9  0.185    0.408  600
                                                                                            224.2  0.194    0.408  616.1
         240      119.2 0.03547       0.4303  96.56 202.76 98.14 123.7                      211.4  0.202    0.407
                                                                                            195.3  0.210    0.406
Propane  260      125.8 0.03606       0.3928 101.29 204.07 103.0 120.0                             0.217    0.405

         280      132.1 0.03666       0.3604 105.83 205.27 107.7 116.1

         300      138.0 0.03727       0.3319 110.21 206.27 112.3 112.4

         320      143.7 0.03790       0.3067 114.47 207.17 116.7 108.6                             0.224    0.404
                                                                                                   0.231    0.403
         340      149.1 0.03855       0.2842 118.60 207.96 121.0 104.7                             0.238    0.402
                                                                                                   0.245    0.401
         360      154.2 0.03923       0.2639 122.66 208.58 125.3 100.9                             0.251    0.400

         380      159.2 0.03994       0.2455 126.61 209.07 129.4                     97.0

         400      164.0 0.04069       0.2287 130.51 209.47 133.5                     93.0

         450      175.1 0.04278       0.1921 140.07 209.87 143.6                     82.2          0.266    0.396
         500                                                                                       0.282    0.391
         600      185.3 0.04538       0.1610 149.61 209.27 153.8                     70.4          0.319    0.367
         616.1                                                                                     0.343    0.343
                  203.4 0.05659       0.1003 172.85 200.27 179.1                     32.2

                  206.1 0.07265       0.07265 186.99 186.99 195.3                    0.0
                                                                                 Tables in English Units 799

TABLE A-18E Properties of Superheated Propane

T       v      u      h          s                 v    u      h          s
                                                ft3/lb
F       ft3/lb Btu/lb Btu/lb Btu/lb # R                 Btu/lb Btu/lb Btu/lb # R
                                               54.99
                p  0.75 lbf/in2                           p  1.5 lbf/in2
               (Tsat  135.1F)                  56.33    (Tsat  118.1F)
                                               59.63
  Sat.  104.8  140.4  154.9      0.496         62.92    144.4 159.7 0.479
130     106.5  141.6  156.4      0.501         66.20
110     113.1  146.6  162.3      0.518         69.47    146.5  162.1      0.486
                                               72.74
 90     119.6  151.8  168.4      0.535         76.01    151.7  168.2      0.503
 70     126.1  157.2  174.7      0.551         79.27    157.1  174.5      0.520
 50     132.7  162.7  181.2      0.568         82.53    162.6  181.0      0.536
                                               85.79
 30     139.2  168.6  187.9      0.584         89.04    168.4  187.7      0.552
 10     145.7  174.4  194.7      0.599                  174.4  194.6      0.568
        152.2  180.7  201.9      0.615                  180.7  201.8      0.583
    10
                                                        187.1  209.1      0.599
30 158.7       187.1  209.2      0.630                  193.8  216.7      0.614
50 165.2       193.8  216.8      0.645                  200.7  224.5      0.629
70 171.7       200.7  224.6      0.660                  207.8  232.5      0.644
90 178.2       207.8  232.6      0.675

                p  5.0 lbf/in2                          p  10.0 lbf/in2
               (Tsat  83.0F)                            (Tsat  58.8F)

 Sat. 18.00    153.0  169.6      0.454         9.468    159.0 176.6       0.441
80 18.15       153.8  170.6      0.456
60 19.17       159.4  177.1      0.473

40 20.17       165.1  183.8      0.489          9.957    80.9   99.3      1.388
20 21.17       171.1  190.7      0.505         10.47     86.9  106.3      1.405
               177.2  197.7      0.521         10.98     93.1  113.4      1.421
    0 22.17
               183.5  205.0      0.536         11.49     99.5  120.8      1.436                               Propane
  20 23.16     190.1  212.5      0.552         11.99    106.1  128.3      1.452
  40 24.15     196.9  220.2      0.567         12.49    113.0  136.1      1.467
  60 25.14
               204.0  228.2      0.582         12.99    120.0  144.1      1.482
  80 26.13     211.3  236.4      0.597         13.49    127.3  152.3      1.497
 100 27.11     218.8  244.8      0.611         13.99    134.9  160.7      1.512
 120 28.09     226.5  253.4      0.626         14.48    142.6  169.4      1.526
 140 29.07

               p  20.0 lbf/in2                          p  40.0 lbf/in2
               (Tsat  30.7F)                              (Tsat  2.1F)

 Sat. 4.971 166.2 184.6          0.430         2.594    174.6 193.8       0.422
20 5.117 169.5 188.5             0.439
                                 0.455
    0 5.385 175.8 195.8

20 5.648 182.4 203.3 0.471                     2.723    180.6  200.8      0.436
40 5.909 189.1 211.0 0.487                     2.864    187.6  208.8      0.453
60 6.167 195.9 218.8 0.502                     3.002    194.6  216.9      0.469

 80 6.424 203.1 226.9 0.518                    3.137    201.8  225.1      0.484
100 6.678 210.5 235.2 0.533                    3.271    209.4  233.6      0.500
120 6.932 218.0 243.7 0.548                    3.403    217.0  242.2      0.515

140 7.184 225.8 252.4 0.562                    3.534    224.9  251.1      0.530
160 7.435 233.9 261.4 0.577                    3.664    232.9  260.1      0.545
180 7.685 242.1 270.6 0.592                    3.793    241.3  269.4      0.559
200 7.935 250.6 280.0 0.606                    3.921    249.8  278.9      0.574
         800 Tables in English Units

         TABLE A-18E (Continued )

                                      T  v  u  h              s                 v     u      h         s
                                                                              ft3/lb
                                      F  ft3/lb Btu/lb Btu/lb Btu/lb # R              Btu/lb Btu/lb Btu/lb # R
                                                                              1.336
                                            p  60.0 lbf/in2                           p  80.0 lbf/in2
                                            (Tsat  24.1F)                             (Tsat  41.1F)

                                      Sat. 1.764 180.2 199.8 0.418                    184.6 204.3 0.415
                                       30 1.794 182.4 202.3 0.384
                                       50 1.894 189.5 210.6 0.400             1.372   187.9  208.2     0.423

                                       70 1.992 196.9 219.0 0.417             1.450   195.4  216.9     0.440
                                       90 2.087 204.4 227.6 0.432             1.526   203.1  225.7     0.456
                                      110 2.179 212.1 236.3 0.448             1.599   210.9  234.6     0.472

                                      130 2.271 220.0 245.2 0.463             1.671   218.8  243.6     0.487
                                      150 2.361 228.0 254.2 0.478             1.741   227.0  252.8     0.503
                                      170 2.450 236.3 263.5 0.493             1.810   235.4  262.2     0.518

                                      190 2.539 244.8 273.0 0.508             1.879   244.0  271.8     0.533
                                      210 2.626 253.5 282.7 0.523             1.946   252.7  281.5     0.548
                                      230 2.713 262.3 292.5 0.537             2.013   261.7  291.5     0.562
                                      250 2.800 271.6 302.7 0.552             2.079   270.9  301.7     0.577

                                            p  100 lbf/in2                             p  120 lbf/in2
                                            (Tsat  55.1F)                              (Tsat  67.2F)

                                      Sat. 1.073 188.1 207.9  0.414           0.8945  191.1 210.9      0.412
                                       60 1.090 189.9 210.1   0.418
                                       80 1.156 197.8 219.2   0.435           0.9323  196.2  216.9     0.424

                                      100 1.219 205.7 228.3 0.452             0.9887  204.3  226.3     0.441
                                      120 1.280 213.7 237.4 0.468             1.043   212.5  235.7     0.457
                                      140 1.340 221.9 246.7 0.483             1.094   220.8  245.1     0.473

Propane                               160 1.398 230.2 256.1 0.499             1.145   229.2  254.7     0.489
                                      180 1.454 238.8 265.7 0.514             1.194   237.9  264.4     0.504
                                      200 1.510 247.5 275.5 0.529             1.242   246.7  274.3     0.520

                                      220 1.566 256.4 285.4 0.544             1.289   255.6  284.3     0.534
                                      240 1.620 265.6 295.6 0.559             1.336   264.8  294.5     0.549
                                      260 1.674 274.9 305.9 0.573             1.382   274.2  304.9     0.564
                                      280 1.728 284.4 316.4 0.588             1.427   283.8  315.5     0.579

                                                              p  140 lbf/in2  0.6665   p  160 lbf/in2  0.411
                                                               (Tsat  78.0F)           (Tsat  87.6F)

                                      Sat. 0.7650 193.7 213.5 0.412                   196.0 215.7
                                       80 0.7705 213.3 214.5 0.413
                                      100 0.8227 222.9 224.2 0.431            0.6968  201.2  221.9     0.422

                                      120 0.8718 232.4 233.8 0.448            0.7427  209.9  231.9     0.439
                                      140 0.9185 242.1 243.5 0.464            0.7859  218.4  241.7     0.456
                                      160 0.9635 251.7 253.2 0.480            0.8272  227.2  251.7     0.472

                                      180 1.007 261.4 263.0 0.496             0.8669  235.9  261.6     0.488
                                      200 1.050 271.4 273.0 0.511             0.9054  244.9  271.7     0.504
                                      220 1.091 281.5 283.2 0.526             0.9430  254.0  282.0     0.519

                                      240 1.132 291.7 293.5 0.541             0.9797  263.4  292.4     0.534
                                      260 1.173 302.1 303.9 0.556             1.016   272.8  302.9     0.549
                                      280 1.213 312.7 314.6 0.571             1.051   282.6  313.7     0.564
                                      300 1.252 323.6 325.5 0.585             1.087   292.4  324.6     0.578
                                                                        Tables in English Units 801

TABLE A-18E (Continued )

T  v  u                   h  s            v     u      h         s
                                        ft3/lb
F  ft3/lb Btu/lb Btu/lb Btu/lb # R              Btu/lb Btu/lb Btu/lb # R
                                        0.5261
      p  180 lbf/in2                            p  200 lbf/in2
      (Tsat  96.5F)                             (Tsat  104.6F)

Sat. 0.5890 198.0 217.6 0.410                   199.8 219.2 0.409
100 0.5972 199.6 219.5 0.413
120 0.6413 208.4 229.8 0.431            0.5591  206.8  227.5     0.424

140 0.6821 217.1 239.9 0.449            0.5983  215.8  238.0     0.441
160 0.7206 226.1 250.1 0.465            0.6349  224.9  248.4     0.458
180 0.7574 234.9 260.2 0.481            0.6694  233.9  258.7     0.475

200 0.7928 244.0 270.4 0.497            0.7025  243.1  269.1     0.491
220 0.8273 253.2 280.8 0.513            0.7345  252.4  279.6     0.506
240 0.8609 262.6 291.3 0.528            0.7656  261.7  290.1     0.522

260 0.8938 272.1 301.9 0.543            0.7960  271.4  300.9     0.537
280 0.9261 281.8 312.7 0.558            0.8257  281.1  311.7     0.552
300 0.9579 291.8 323.7 0.572            0.8549  291.1  322.8     0.567
320 0.9894 301.9 334.9 0.587            0.8837  301.3  334.0     0.581

                        p  220 lbf/in2          p  240 lbf/in2
                        (Tsat  112.1F)          (Tsat  119.2F)

Sat. 0.4741 201.4 220.7 0.408           0.4303  202.8  221.9     0.408
120 0.4906 205.1 225.1 0.416            0.4321  203.2  222.4     0.409
140 0.5290 214.4 236.0 0.435            0.4704  212.9  233.8     0.428

160 0.5642 223.6 246.6 0.452            0.5048  222.4  244.8     0.446
180 0.5971 232.9 257.2 0.469            0.5365  231.6  255.5     0.463
200 0.6284 242.1 267.7 0.485            0.5664  241.1  266.3     0.480

220 0.6585 251.5 278.3 0.501            0.5949  250.5  277.0     0.496                               Propane
240 0.6875 261.0 289.0 0.516            0.6223  260.1  287.8     0.511
260 0.7158 270.6 299.8 0.532            0.6490  269.8  298.7     0.527

280 0.7435 280.5 310.8 0.547            0.6749  279.8  309.8     0.542
300 0.7706 290.5 321.9 0.561            0.7002  289.8  320.9     0.557
320 0.7972 300.6 333.1 0.576            0.7251  300.1  332.3     0.571
340 0.8235 311.0 344.6 0.591            0.7496  310.5  343.8     0.586

                        p  260 lbf/in2  0.3604   p  280 lbf/in2  0.406
                        (Tsat  125.8F)          (Tsat  132.1F)

Sat. 0.3928 204.1 223.0 0.407                   205.3 223.9
130 0.4012 206.3 225.6 0.411
150 0.4374 216.1 237.2 0.431            0.3932  214.5  234.9     0.424

170 0.4697 225.8 248.4 0.449            0.4253  224.4  246.5     0.443
190 0.4995 235.2 259.3 0.466            0.4544  234.1  257.7     0.461
210 0.5275 244.8 270.2 0.482            0.4815  243.8  268.8     0.477

230 0.5541 254.4 281.1 0.498            0.5072  253.5  279.8     0.494
250 0.5798 264.2 292.1 0.514            0.5317  263.3  290.9     0.510
270 0.6046 274.1 303.2 0.530            0.5553  273.3  302.1     0.525

290 0.6288 284.0 314.3 0.545            0.5783  283.4  313.4     0.540
310 0.6524 294.3 325.7 0.560            0.6007  293.5  324.7     0.555
330 0.6756 304.7 337.2 0.574            0.6226  304.0  336.3     0.570
350 0.6984 315.2 348.8 0.589            0.6441  314.6  348.0     0.585
         802 Tables in English Units

         TABLE A-18E (Continued )

                                      T  v  u  h            s                   v     u      h         s
                                                                              ft3/lb
                                      F  ft3/lb Btu/lb Btu/lb Btu/lb # R              Btu/lb Btu/lb Btu/lb # R
                                                                              0.2639
                                            p  320 lbf/in2                            p  360 lbf/in2
                                            (Tsat  143.7F)                            (Tsat  154.2F)

                                      Sat. 0.3067 207.2 225.3 0.404                   208.6 226.2 0.402
                                      150 0.3187 210.7 229.6 0.412
                                      170 0.3517 221.4 242.3 0.432            0.2920  217.9  237.4     0.420

                                      190 0.3803 231.7 254.2 0.450            0.3213  228.8  250.2     0.440
                                      210 0.4063 241.6 265.7 0.468            0.3469  239.3  262.4     0.459
                                      230 0.4304 251.6 277.1 0.485            0.3702  249.5  274.2     0.476

                                      250 0.4533 261.6 288.5 0.501            0.3919  259.8  285.9     0.493
                                      270 0.4751 271.7 299.9 0.517            0.4124  270.1  297.6     0.509
                                      290 0.4961 281.9 311.3 0.532            0.4320  280.4  309.2     0.525

                                      310 0.5165 292.3 322.9 0.548            0.4510  290.8  320.9     0.540
                                      330 0.5364 302.7 334.5 0.563            0.4693  301.4  332.7     0.556
                                      350 0.5559 313.4 346.3 0.577            0.4872  312.2  344.7     0.570
                                      370 0.5750 324.2 358.3 0.592            0.5047  323.0  356.7     0.585

                                                              p  400 lbf/in2  0.1921   p  450 lbf/in2  0.396
                                                              (Tsat  164.0F)          (Tsat  175.1F)

                                      Sat. 0.2287 209.5 226.5 0.400                   209.9 225.9
                                      170 0.2406 213.6 231.4 0.408
Propane                               190 0.2725 225.6 245.8 0.430            0.2205  220.7  239.1     0.416

                                      210 0.2985 236.7 258.8 0.450            0.2486  233.0  253.7     0.439
                                      230 0.3215 247.4 271.2 0.468            0.2719  244.3  267.0     0.458
                                      250 0.3424 257.8 283.2 0.485            0.2925  255.2  279.6     0.476

                                      270 0.3620 268.3 295.1 0.502            0.3113  266.0  292.0     0.493
                                      290 0.3806 278.8 307.0 0.518            0.3290  276.8  304.2     0.510
                                      310 0.3984 289.4 318.9 0.534            0.3457  287.6  316.4     0.526

                                      330 0.4156 300.1 330.9 0.549            0.3617  298.4  328.5     0.542
                                      350 0.4322 311.0 343.0 0.564            0.3772  309.4  340.8     0.557
                                      370 0.4484 321.9 355.1 0.579            0.3922  320.4  353.1     0.572
                                      390 0.4643 333.1 367.5 0.594            0.4068  331.7  365.6     0.587

                                                              p  500 lbf/in2  0.1003   p  600 lbf/in2  0.367
                                                              (Tsat  185.3F)          (Tsat  203.4F)

                                      Sat. 0.1610 209.3 224.2 0.391                   200.3 211.4
                                      190 0.1727 213.8 229.8 0.399
                                      210 0.2066 228.6 247.7 0.426            0.1307  214.3  228.8     0.394

                                      230 0.2312 240.9 262.3 0.448            0.1661  232.2  250.7     0.426
                                      250 0.2519 252.4 275.7 0.467            0.1892  245.8  266.8     0.449
                                      270 0.2704 263.6 288.6 0.485            0.2080  258.1  281.2     0.469

                                      290 0.2874 274.6 301.2 0.502            0.2245  269.8  294.8     0.487
                                      310 0.3034 285.6 313.7 0.519            0.2396  281.4  308.0     0.505
                                      330 0.3186 296.6 326.1 0.534            0.2536  292.8  321.0     0.521

                                      350 0.3331 307.7 338.6 0.550            0.2669  304.2  333.9     0.538
                                      370 0.3471 318.9 351.0 0.565            0.2796  315.7  346.8     0.553
                                      390 0.3607 330.2 363.6 0.580            0.2917  327.3  359.7     0.569
                                      410 0.3740 341.7 376.3 0.595            0.3035  338.9  372.6     0.584
                                                                                                             Tables in English Units 803

TABLE A-19E Properties of Selected Solids and Liquids: cp, , and 

Substance                           Specific    Density,               Thermal
                                                                   Conductivity, 
                                    Heat, cp                       (Btu/h # ft # R)
                                  (Btu/lb # R)  (lb/ft3)

Selected Solids, 540R             0.216         169                                                   137

Aluminum                          0.301         84.3                                                  0.15
Coal, anthracite
Copper                            0.092         557                                                   232
Granite
Iron                              0.185         164                                                   1.61
Lead
Sand                              0.107         491                                                   46.4
Silver
Soil                              0.031         705                                                   20.4
Steel (AISI 302)
Tin                               0.191         94.9                                                  0.16

                                  0.056         656                                                   248

                                  0.439         128                                                   0.30

                                  0.115         503                                                   8.7

                                  0.054         456                                                   38.5

Building Materials, 540R          0.199         120                                                    0.42
                                  0.210         144                                                    0.81
Brick, common                     0.179         156                                                    0.81
Concrete (stone mix)              0.279          40                                                   0.054
Glass, plate                      0.193         145                                                    1.24
Hardboard, siding                 0.291          34                                                   0.069
Limestone                         0.330          31.8                                                 0.069
Plywood
Softwoods (fir, pine)

Insulating Materials, 540R

Blanket (glass fiber)             --            1.0                                                   0.027
                                                                                                      0.023
Cork                              0.43          7.5                                                   0.022
                                                                                                      0.016
Duct liner (glass fiber, coated)  0.199         2.0                                                   0.039

Polystyrene (extruded)            0.289         3.4

Vermiculite fill (flakes)         0.199         5.0

Saturated Liquids                 1.151         37.5                                                  0.269                               Table A-19E
                                  0.033         845                                                    4.94
Ammonia, 540R                     0.303         74.0
Mercury, 540R                     0.343         75.0                                                  0.049
Refrigerant 22, 540R              0.456         55.2                                                  0.047
Refrigerant 134a, 540R            1.006         62.42                                                 0.084
Unused Engine Oil, 540R           0.998         62.23                                                 0.332
Water, 495R                       0.999         61.61                                                 0.354
                                  1.002         60.79                                                 0.373
        540R                      1.008         59.76                                                 0.386
        585R                      1.017         58.55                                                 0.394
        630R                                                                                          0.398
        675R
        720R

Source: Drawn from several sources, these data are only representative. Values can vary depending on
temperature, purity, moisture content, and other factors.
             804 Tables in English Units

             TABLE A-20E Ideal Gas Specific Heats of Some Common Gases (Btu/lb # R)

                                                cp     cv         k  cp     cv            k      cp     cv          k

             Temp.                                      Air                 Nitrogen, N2                Oxygen, O2         Temp.
               F                                                                                                             F
                                                0.240  0.171  1.401  0.248  0.177         1.400  0.219  0.156       1.397
                40                              0.240  0.172  1.400  0.248  0.178         1.399  0.220  0.158       1.394     40
               100                              0.241  0.173  1.397  0.249  0.178         1.398  0.223  0.161       1.387    100
               200                                                                                                           200

                                          300 0.243 0.174 1.394 0.250 0.179 1.396 0.226 0.164 1.378 300
                                          400 0.245 0.176 1.389 0.251 0.180 1.393 0.230 0.168 1.368 400
                                          500 0.248 0.179 1.383 0.254 0.183 1.388 0.235 0.173 1.360 500

                                          600 0.250 0.182 1.377 0.256 0.185 1.383 0.239 0.177 1.352 600
                                          700 0.254 0.185 1.371 0.260 0.189 1.377 0.242 0.181 1.344 700
                                          800 0.257 0.188 1.365 0.262 0.191 1.371 0.246 0.184 1.337 800

               900                              0.259  0.191  1.358  0.265  0.194         1.364  0.249  0.187       1.331    900
             1000                               0.263  0.195  1.353  0.269  0.198         1.359  0.252  0.190       1.326  1000
             1500                               0.276  0.208  1.330  0.283  0.212         1.334  0.263  0.201       1.309  1500
             2000                               0.286  0.217  1.312  0.293  0.222         1.319  0.270  0.208       1.298  2000

             Temp.                                     Carbon                Carbon                  Hydrogen, H2          Temp.
               F                                    Dioxide, CO2         Monoxide, CO                                        F

                40                              0.195  0.150  1.300  0.248  0.177         1.400  3.397  2.412       1.409     40
               100                              0.205  0.160  1.283  0.249  0.178         1.399  3.426  2.441       1.404    100
               200                              0.217  0.172  1.262  0.249  0.179         1.397  3.451  2.466       1.399    200

                                          300 0.229 0.184 1.246 0.251 0.180 1.394 3.461 2.476 1.398 300
                                          400 0.239 0.193 1.233 0.253 0.182 1.389 3.466 2.480 1.397 400
                                          500 0.247 0.202 1.223 0.256 0.185 1.384 3.469 2.484 1.397 500

                                          600 0.255 0.210 1.215 0.259 0.188 1.377 3.473 2.488 1.396 600
                                          700 0.262 0.217 1.208 0.262 0.191 1.371 3.477 2.492 1.395 700
                                          800 0.269 0.224 1.202 0.266 0.195 1.364 3.494 2.509 1.393 800

                                           900  0.275  0.230  1.197  0.269  0.198         1.357  3.502  2.519       1.392   900
                                          1000  0.280  0.235  1.192  0.273  0.202         1.351  3.513  2.528       1.390  1000
                                          1500  0.298  0.253  1.178  0.287  0.216         1.328  3.618  2.633       1.374  1500
                                          2000  0.312  0.267  1.169  0.297  0.226         1.314  3.758  2.773       1.355  2000

             Source: Adapted from K. Wark, Thermodynamics, 4th ed., McGraw-Hill, New York, 1983, as based on "Tables
             of Thermal Properties of Gases," NBS Circular 564, 1955.

Table A-20E
                                                                                                               Tables in English Units 805

TABLE A-21E Variation of cp with Temperature for Selected Ideal Gases
                                        cp  a  bT  gT 2  dT 3  eT 4
                                         R

                  T is in R, equations valid from 540 to 1800 R

Gas                 103      106      109                                   1012

CO         3.710  0.899      1.140  0.348                                   0.0228
CO2        2.401    4.853  2.039      0.343                                 0
H2         3.057    1.487  1.793      0.947                               0.1726
H2O        4.070                                                            0.0769
                  0.616      1.281  0.508
O2         3.626                                                            0.2053
N2         3.675  1.043      2.178  1.160                                 0.0215
Air        3.653  0.671      0.717  0.108
NH3        3.591  0.7428     1.017  0.328                                   0.02632
                             2.576  1.437                                   0.2601
NO         4.046    0.274
NO2        3.459             2.464  1.048                                   0.1517
SO2        3.267  1.899      2.064  1.639                                   0.3448
SO3        2.578    1.147    0.211  0.906                                   0.2438
                    2.958  2.832    0.136                                   0.1878
CH4        3.826    8.087
C2H2       1.410             7.580  3.898                                   0.6633
C2H4       1.426  2.211    7.562      2.811                               0.3939
                   10.587
                    6.324    2.466  2.787                                   0.6429

Monatomic

gasesa     2.5    0        0                                           0  0

aFor monatomic gases, such as He, Ne, and Ar, cp is constant over a wide temperature range and is very nearly
equal to 52 R.

Source: Adapted from K. Wark, Thermodynamics, 4th ed., McGraw-Hill, New York, 1983, as based on NASA
SP-273, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, DC, 1971.

                                                                                                                                            Table A-21E
             806 Tables in English Units

Table A-22E  TABLE A-22E Ideal Gas Properties of Air

                                                      T(R), h and u(Btu/lb), s(Btu/lb # R)

                                                      when s  01                                                      when s  0

             T  h  u                      s           pr                       vr        T     h       u        s     pr      vr

             360 85.97 61.29 0.50369                  0.3363                   396.6    940  226.11  161.68  0.73509   9.834  35.41
             380 90.75 64.70 0.51663                  0.4061                   346.6    960  231.06  165.26  0.74030  10.61   33.52
             400 95.53 68.11 0.52890                  0.4858                   305.0    980  236.02  168.83  0.74540  11.43   31.76
             420 100.32 71.52 0.54058                 0.5760                   270.1   1000  240.98  172.43  0.75042  12.30   30.12
             440 105.11 74.93 0.55172                 0.6776                   240.6   1040  250.95  179.66  0.76019  14.18   27.17

             460 109.90 78.36 0.56235                 0.7913                   215.33  1080  260.97  186.93  0.76964  16.28   24.58
             480 114.69 81.77 0.57255                 0.9182                   193.65  1120  271.03  194.25  0.77880  18.60   22.30
             500 119.48 85.20 0.58233                 1.0590                   174.90  1160  281.14  201.63  0.78767  21.18   20.29
             520 124.27 88.62 0.59172                 1.2147                   158.58  1200  291.30  209.05  0.79628  24.01   18.51
             537 128.34 91.53 0.59945                 1.3593                   146.34  1240  301.52  216.53  0.80466  27.13   16.93

             540 129.06 92.04 0.60078                 1.3860                   144.32  1280  311.79  224.05  0.81280  30.55   15.52
             560 133.86 95.47 0.60950                 1.5742                   131.78  1320  322.11  231.63  0.82075  34.31   14.25
             580 138.66 98.90 0.61793                 1.7800                   120.70  1360  332.48  239.25  0.82848  38.41   13.12
             600 143.47 102.34 0.62607                2.005                    110.88  1400  342.90  246.93  0.83604  42.88   12.10
             620 148.28 105.78 0.63395                2.249                    102.12  1440  353.37  254.66  0.84341  47.75   11.17

             640 153.09 109.21 0.64159                2.514                    94.30   1480  363.89  262.44  0.85062  53.04   10.34
             660 157.92 112.67 0.64902                2.801                    87.27   1520  374.47  270.26  0.85767  58.78    9.578
             680 162.73 116.12 0.65621                3.111                    80.96   1560  385.08  278.13  0.86456  65.00    8.890
             700 167.56 119.58 0.66321                3.446                    75.25   1600  395.74  286.06  0.87130  71.73    8.263
             720 172.39 123.04 0.67002                3.806                    70.07   1650  409.13  296.03  0.87954  80.89    7.556

             740 177.23 126.51 0.67665                4.193                    65.38   1700  422.59  306.06  0.88758   90.95  6.924
             760 182.08 129.99 0.68312                4.607                    61.10   1750  436.12  316.16  0.89542  101.98  6.357
             780 186.94 133.47 0.68942                5.051                    57.20   1800  449.71  326.32  0.90308  114.0   5.847
             800 191.81 136.97 0.69558                5.526                    53.63   1850  463.37  336.55  0.91056  127.2   5.388
             820 196.69 140.47 0.70160                6.033                    50.35   1900  477.09  346.85  0.91788  141.5   4.974

             840 201.56 143.98 0.70747                6.573                    47.34   1950  490.88  357.20  0.92504  157.1   4.598
             860 206.46 147.50 0.71323                7.149                    44.57   2000  504.71  367.61  0.93205  174.0   4.258
             880 211.35 151.02 0.71886                7.761                    42.01   2050  518.61  378.08  0.93891  192.3   3.949
             900 216.26 154.57 0.72438                8.411                    39.64   2100  532.55  388.60  0.94564  212.1   3.667
             920 221.18 158.12 0.72979                9.102                    37.44   2150  546.54  399.17  0.95222  233.5   3.410

             1. pr and vr data for use with Eqs. 6.43 and 6.44, respectively.
                                                                              Tables in English Units 807

TABLE A-22E (Continued )                                                                                   Table A-22E

                               T(R), h and u(Btu/lb), s(Btu/lb # R)

                               when s  01                                              when s  0

  T     h        u       s     pr      vr        T       h               u       s     pr     vr

2200  560.59  409.78  0.95868  256.6   3.176   3700   998.11          744.48  1.10991  2330   .5882
2250  574.69  420.46  0.96501  281.4   2.961   3750  1013.1           756.04  1.11393  2471   .5621
2300  588.82  431.16  0.97123  308.1   2.765   3800  1028.1           767.60  1.11791  2618   .5376
2350  603.00  441.91  0.97732  336.8   2.585   3850  1043.1           779.19  1.12183  2773   .5143
2400  617.22  452.70  0.98331  367.6   2.419   3900  1058.1           790.80  1.12571  2934   .4923

2450  631.48  463.54  0.98919  400.5   2.266   3950  1073.2           802.43  1.12955  3103   .4715
2500  645.78  474.40  0.99497  435.7   2.125   4000  1088.3           814.06  1.13334  3280   .4518
2550  660.12  485.31  1.00064  473.3   1.996   4050  1103.4           825.72  1.13709  3464   .4331
2600  674.49  496.26  1.00623  513.5   1.876   4100  1118.5           837.40  1.14079  3656   .4154
2650  688.90  507.25  1.01172  556.3   1.765   4150  1133.6           849.09  1.14446  3858   .3985

2700  703.35  518.26  1.01712  601.9   1.662   4200  1148.7           860.81  1.14809  4067   .3826
2750  717.83  529.31  1.02244  650.4   1.566   4300  1179.0           884.28  1.15522  4513   .3529
2800  732.33  540.40  1.02767  702.0   1.478   4400  1209.4           907.81  1.16221  4997   .3262
2850  746.88  551.52  1.03282  756.7   1.395   4500  1239.9           931.39  1.16905  5521   .3019
2900  761.45  562.66  1.03788  814.8   1.318   4600  1270.4           955.04  1.17575  6089   .2799

2950  776.05  573.84  1.04288   876.4  1.247   4700  1300.9           978.73  1.18232  6701   .2598
3000  790.68  585.04  1.04779   941.4  1.180   4800  1331.5          1002.5   1.18876  7362   .2415
3050  805.34  596.28  1.05264  1011    1.118   4900  1362.2          1026.3   1.19508  8073   .2248
3100  820.03  607.53  1.05741  1083    1.060   5000  1392.9          1050.1   1.20129  8837   .2096
3150  834.75  618.82  1.06212  1161    1.006   5100  1423.6          1074.0   1.20738  9658   .1956

3200  849.48  630.12  1.06676  1242    0.9546  5200 1454.4           1098.0   1.21336  10539  .1828
3250  864.24  641.46  1.07134  1328    0.9069  5300 1485.3           1122.0   1.21923  11481  .1710
3300  879.02  652.81  1.07585  1418    0.8621
3350  893.83  664.20  1.08031  1513    0.8202
3400  908.66  675.60  1.08470  1613    0.7807

3450  923.52  687.04  1.08904  1719    0.7436
3500  938.40  698.48  1.09332  1829    0.7087
3550  953.30  709.95  1.09755  1946    0.6759
3600  968.21  721.44  1.10172  2068    0.6449
3650  983.15  732.95  1.10584  2196    0.6157
                                                                                                                               Table A-23E

808  TABLE A-23E Ideal Gas Properties of Selected Gases

                                                         T(R), h and u(Btu/lbmol), s°(Btu/lbmol # R)

               Carbon Dioxide, CO2      Carbon Monoxide, CO           Water Vapor, H2O                    Oxygen, O2               Nitrogen, N2
           (h°f  169,300 Btu /lbmol)  (h°f  47,540 Btu /lbmol)   (h°f  104,040 Btu /lbmol)            (h°f  0 Btu /lbmol)      (h°f  0 Btu /lbmol)

     T     h       u       s°         h       u          s°      h       u       s°         h         u                    s°  h            u       s°   T

      300  2108.2  1512.4  46.353     2081.9  1486.1     43.223  2367.6  1771.8  40.439     2073.5    1477.8  44.927           2082.0  1486.2  41.695    300
      320  2256.6  1621.1  46.832     2220.9  1585.4     43.672  2526.8  1891.3  40.952     2212.6    1577.1  45.375           2221.0  1585.5  42.143    320
      340  2407.3  1732.1  47.289     2359.9  1684.7     44.093  2686.0  2010.8  41.435     2351.7    1676.5  45.797           2360.0  1684.4  42.564    340
      360  2560.5  1845.6  47.728     2498.8  1783.9     44.490  2845.1  2130.2  41.889     2490.8    1775.9  46.195           2498.9  1784.0  42.962    360
      380  2716.4  1961.8  48.148     2637.9  1883.3     44.866  3004.4  2249.8  42.320     2630.0    1875.3  46.571           2638.0  1883.4  43.337    380

      400  2874.7  2080.4  48.555     2776.9  1982.6     45.223  3163.8  2369.4  42.728     2769.1    1974.8  46.927           2777.0  1982.6  43.694    400
      420  3035.7  2201.7  48.947     2916.0  2081.9     45.563  3323.2  2489.1  43.117     2908.3    2074.3  47.267           2916.1  2082.0  44.034    420
      440  3199.4  2325.6  49.329     3055.0  2181.2     45.886  3482.7  2608.9  43.487     3047.5    2173.8  47.591           3055.1  2181.3  44.357    440
      460  3365.7  2452.2  49.698     3194.0  2280.5     46.194  3642.3  2728.8  43.841     3186.9    2273.4  47.900           3194.1  2280.6  44.665    460
      480  3534.7  2581.5  50.058     3333.0  2379.8     46.491  3802.0  2848.8  44.182     3326.5    2373.3  48.198           3333.1  2379.9  44.962    480

      500  3706.2  2713.3  50.408     3472.1  2479.2     46.775  3962.0  2969.1  44.508     3466.2    2473.2  48.483           3472.2  2479.3  45.246    500
      520  3880.3  2847.7  50.750     3611.2  2578.6     47.048  4122.0  3089.4  44.821     3606.1    2573.4  48.757           3611.3  2578.6  45.519    520
      537  4027.5  2963.8  51.032     3725.1  2663.1     47.272  4258.0  3191.9  45.079     3725.1    2658.7  48.982           3729.5  2663.1  45.743    537
      540  4056.8  2984.4  51.082     3750.3  2677.9     47.310  4282.4  3210.0  45.124     3746.2    2673.8  49.021           3750.3  2678.0  45.781    540
      560  4235.8  3123.7  51.408     3889.5  2777.4     47.563  4442.8  3330.7  45.415     3886.6    2774.5  49.276           3889.5  2777.4  46.034    560

      580  4417.2  3265.4  51.726     4028.7  2876.9     47.807  4603.7  3451.9  45.696     4027.3    2875.5  49.522           4028.7  2876.9  46.278    580
      600  4600.9  3409.4  52.038     4168.0  2976.5     48.044  4764.7  3573.2  45.970     4168.3    2976.8  49.762           4167.9  2976.4  46.514    600
      620  4786.6  3555.6  52.343     4307.4  3076.2     48.272  4926.1  3694.9  46.235     4309.7    3078.4  49.993           4307.1  3075.9  46.742    620
      640  4974.9  3704.0  52.641     4446.9  3175.9     48.494  5087.8  3816.8  46.492     4451.4    3180.4  50.218           4446.4  3175.5  46.964    640
      660  5165.2  3854.6  52.934     4586.6  3275.8     48.709  5250.0  3939.3  46.741     4593.5    3282.9  50.437           4585.8  3275.2  47.178    660

      680  5357.6  4007.2  53.225     4726.2  3375.8     48.917  5412.5  4062.1  46.984     4736.2    3385.8  50.650           4725.3  3374.9  47.386    680
      700  5552.0  4161.9  53.503     4866.0  3475.9     49.120  5575.4  4185.3  47.219     4879.3    3489.2  50.858           4864.9  3474.8  47.588    700
      720  5748.4  4318.6  53.780     5006.1  3576.3     49.317  5738.8  4309.0  47.450     5022.9    3593.1  51.059           5004.5  3574.7  47.785    720
      740  5946.8  4477.3  54.051     5146.4  3676.9     49.509  5902.6  4433.1  47.673     5167.0    3697.4  51.257           5144.3  3674.7  47.977    740
      760  6147.0  4637.9  54.319     5286.8  3777.5     49.697  6066.9  4557.6  47.893     5311.4    3802.2  51.450           5284.1  3774.9  48.164    760

      780  6349.1  4800.1  54.582     5427.4  3878.4     49.880  6231.7  4682.7  48.106     5456.4    3907.5  51.638           5424.2  3875.2  48.345    780
      800  6552.9  4964.2  54.839     5568.2  3979.5     50.058  6396.9  4808.2  48.316     5602.0    4013.3  51.821           5564.4  3975.7  48.522    800
      820  6758.3  5129.9  55.093     5709.4  4081.0     50.232  6562.6  4934.2  48.520     5748.1    4119.7  52.002           5704.7  4076.3  48.696    820
      840  6965.7  5297.6  55.343     5850.7  4182.6     50.402  6728.9  5060.8  48.721     5894.8    4226.6  52.179           5845.3  4177.1  48.865    840
      860  7174.7  5466.9  55.589     5992.3  4284.5     50.569  6895.6  5187.8  48.916     6041.9    4334.1  52.352           5985.9  4278.1  49.031    860

      880  7385.3  5637.7  55.831     6134.2  4386.6     50.732  7062.9  5315.3  49.109     6189.6    4442.0  52.522           6126.9  4379.4  49.193    880
      900  7597.6  5810.3  56.070     6276.4  4489.1     50.892  7230.9  5443.6  49.298     6337.9    4550.6  52.688           6268.1  4480.8  49.352    900
      920  7811.4  5984.4  56.305     6419.0  4592.0     51.048  7399.4  5572.4  49.483     6486.7    4659.7  52.852           6409.6  4582.6  49.507    920
      940  8026.8  6160.1  56.536     6561.7  4695.0     51.202  7568.4  5701.7  49.665     6636.1    4769.4  53.012           6551.2  4684.5  49.659    940
      960  8243.8  6337.4  56.765     6704.9  4798.5     51.353  7738.0  5831.6  49.843     6786.0    4879.5  53.170           6693.1  4786.7  49.808    960

      980  8462.2  6516.1  56.990     6848.4  4902.3     51.501  7908.2  5962.0  50.019     6936.4    4990.3  53.326           6835.4  4889.3  49.955    980
     1000  8682.1  6696.2  57.212     6992.2  5006.3     51.646  8078.9  6093.0  50.191     7087.5    5101.6  53.477           6977.9  4992.0  50.099   1000
     1020  8903.4  6877.8  57.432     7136.4  5110.8     51.788  8250.4  6224.8  50.360     7238.9    5213.3  53.628           7120.7  5095.1  50.241   1020
     1040  9126.2  7060.9  57.647     7281.0  5215.7     51.929  8422.4  6357.1  50.528     7391.0    5325.7  53.775           7263.8  5198.5  50.380   1040
     1060  9350.3  7245.3  57.861     7425.9  5320.9     52.067  8595.0  6490.0  50.693     7543.6    5438.6  53.921           7407.2  5302.2  50.516   1060
     TABLE A-23E (Continued )

                                                        T(R), h and u(Btu/lbmol), s°(Btu/lbmol # R)

               Carbon Dioxide, CO2       Carbon Monoxide, CO          Water Vapor, H2O                   Oxygen, O2               Nitrogen, N2
           (h°f  169,300 Btu /lbmol)   (h°f  47,540 Btu /lbmol)  (h°f  104,040 Btu /lbmol)           (h°f  0 Btu /lbmol)      (h°f  0 Btu /lbmol)

        T  h        u          s°      h        u       s°       h        u        s°       h        u                    s°  h            u       s°   T

     1080   9575.8  7431.1     58.072  7571.1   5426.4  52.203   8768.2   6623.5   50.854   7696.8   5552.1   54.064          7551.0   5406.2  50.651  1080
     1100   9802.6  7618.1     58.281  7716.8   5532.3  52.337   8942.0   6757.5   51.013   7850.4   5665.9   54.204          7695.0   5510.5  50.783  1100
     1120  10030.6  7806.4     58.485  7862.9   5638.7  52.468   9116.4   6892.2   51.171   8004.5   5780.3   54.343          7839.3   5615.2  50.912  1120
     1140  10260.1  7996.2     58.689  8009.2   5745.4  52.598   9291.4   7027.5   51.325   8159.1   5895.2   54.480          7984.0   5720.1  51.040  1140
     1160  10490.6  8187.0     58.889  8156.1   5851.5  52.726   9467.1   7163.5   51.478   8314.2   6010.6   54.614          8129.0   5825.4  51.167  1160

     1180  10722.3  8379.0     59.088  8303.3   5960.0  52.852    9643.4  7300.1   51.630   8469.8   6126.5   54.748          8274.4   5931.0  51.291  1180
     1200  10955.3  8572.3     59.283  8450.8   6067.8  52.976    9820.4  7437.4   51.777   8625.8   6242.8   54.879          8420.0   6037.0  51.413  1200
     1220  11189.4  8766.6     59.477  8598.8   6176.0  53.098    9998.0  7575.2   51.925   8782.4   6359.6   55.008          8566.1   6143.4  51.534  1220
     1240  11424.6  8962.1     59.668  8747.2   6284.7  53.218   10176.1  7713.6   52.070   8939.4   6476.9   55.136          8712.6   6250.1  51.653  1240
     1260  11661.0  9158.8     59.858  8896.0   6393.8  53.337   10354.9  7852.7   52.212   9096.7   6594.5   55.262          8859.3   6357.2  51.771  1260

     1280  11898.4   9356.5    60.044   9045.0  6503.1  53.455   10534.4  7992.5   52.354    9254.6  6712.7   55.386          9006.4   6464.5  51.887  1280
     1300  12136.9   9555.3    60.229   9194.6  6613.0  53.571   10714.5  8132.9   52.494    9412.9  6831.3   55.508          9153.9   6572.3  51.001  1300
     1320  12376.4   9755.0    60.412   9344.6  6723.2  53.685   10895.3  8274.0   52.631    9571.6  6950.2   55.630          9301.8   6680.4  52.114  1320
     1340  12617.0   9955.9    60.593   9494.8  6833.7  53.799   11076.6  8415.5   52.768    9730.7  7069.6   55.750          9450.0   6788.9  52.225  1340
     1360  12858.5  10157.7    60.772   9645.5  6944.7  53.910   11258.7  8557.9   52.903    9890.2  7189.4   55.867          9598.6   6897.8  52.335  1360

     1380  13101.0  10360.5    60.949   9796.6  7056.1  54.021   11441.4  8700.9   53.037   10050.1  7309.6   55.984           9747.5  7007.0  52.444  1380
     1400  13344.7  10564.5    61.124   9948.1  7167.9  54.129   11624.8  8844.6   53.168   10210.4  7430.1   56.099           9896.9  7116.7  52.551  1400
     1420  13589.1  10769.2    61.298  10100.0  7280.1  54.237   11808.8  8988.9   53.299   10371.0  7551.1   56.213          10046.6  7226.7  52.658  1420
     1440  13834.5  10974.8    61.469  10252.2  7392.6  54.344   11993.4  9133.8   53.428   10532.0  7672.4   56.326          10196.6  7337.0  52.763  1440
     1460  14080.8  11181.4    61.639  10404.8  7505.4  54.448   12178.8  9279.4   53.556   10693.3  7793.9   56.437          10347.0  7447.6  52.867  1460

     1480  14328.0  11388.9    61.800  10557.8  7618.7  54.522   12364.8   9425.7  53.682   10855.1  7916.0   56.547          10497.8  7558.7  52.969  1480
     1500  14576.0  11597.2    61.974  10711.1  7732.3  54.665   12551.4   9572.7  53.808   11017.1  8038.3   56.656          10648.0  7670.1  53.071  1500
     1520  14824.9  11806.4    62.138  10864.9  7846.4  54.757   12738.8   9720.3  53.932   11179.6  8161.1   56.763          10800.4  7781.9  53.171  1520
     1540  15074.7  12016.5    62.302  11019.0  7960.8  54.858   12926.8   9868.6  54.055   11342.4  8284.2   56.869          10952.2  7893.9  53.271  1540
     1560  15325.3  12227.3    62.464  11173.4  8075.4  54.958   13115.6  10017.6  54.117   11505.4  8407.4   56.975          11104.3  8006.4  53.369  1560

     1580  15576.7  12439.0    62.624  11328.2  8190.5  55.056   13305.0  10167.3  54.298   11668.8  8531.1   57.079          11256.9  8119.2  53.465  1580
     1600  15829.0  12651.6    62.783  11483.4  8306.0  55.154   13494.4  10317.6  54.418   11832.5  8655.1   57.182          11409.7  8232.3  53.561  1600
     1620  16081.9  12864.8    62.939  11638.9  8421.8  55.251   13685.7  10468.6  54.535   11996.6  8779.5   57.284          11562.8  8345.7  53.656  1620
     1640  16335.7  13078.9    63.095  11794.7  8537.9  55.347   13877.0  10620.2  54.653   12160.9  8904.1   57.385          11716.4  8459.6  53.751  1640
     1660  16590.2  13293.7    63.250  11950.9  8654.4  55.411   14069.2  10772.7  54.770   12325.5  9029.0   57.484          11870.2  8573.6  53.844  1660

     1680  16845.5  13509.2    63.403  12107.5  8771.2  55.535   14261.9  10925.6  54.886   12490.4  9154.1   57.582          12024.3  8688.1  53.936  1680
     1700  17101.4  13725.4    63.555  12264.3  8888.3  55.628   14455.4  11079.4  54.999   12655.6  9279.6   57.680          12178.9  8802.9  54.028  1700
     1720  17358.1  13942.4    63.704  12421.4  9005.7  55.720   14649.5  11233.8  55.113   12821.1  9405.4   57.777          12333.7  8918.0  54.118  1720
     1740  17615.5  14160.1    63.853  12579.0  9123.6  55.811   14844.3  11388.9  55.226   12986.9  9531.5   57.873          12488.8  9033.4  54.208  1740
     1760  17873.5  14378.4    64.001  12736.7  9241.6  55.900   15039.8  11544.7  55.339   13153.0  9657.9   57.968          12644.3  9149.2  54.297  1760

809  1780  18132.2  14597.4    64.147  12894.9  9360.0  55.990   15236.1  11701.2  55.449   13319.2   9784.4  58.062          12800.2  9265.3  54.385  1780
     1800  18391.5  14816.9    64.292  13053.2  9478.6  56.078   15433.0  11858.4  55.559   13485.8   9911.2  58.155          12956.3  9381.7  54.472  1800
     1820  18651.5  15037.2    64.435  13212.0  9597.7  56.166   15630.6  12016.3  55.668   13652.5  10038.2  58.247          13112.7  9498.4  54.559  1820
     1840  18912.2  15258.2    64.578  13371.0  9717.0  56.253   15828.7  12174.7  55.777   13819.6  10165.6  58.339          13269.5  9615.5  54.645  1840
     1860  19173.4  15479.7    64.719  13530.2  9836.5  56.339   16027.6  12333.9  55.884   13986.8  10293.1  58.428          13426.5  9732.8  54.729  1860

                                                                                                                              Table A-23E
                                                                                                                             Table A-23E

810  TABLE A-23E (Continued )

                                                       T(R), h and u(Btu/lbmol), s°(Btu/lbmol # R)

               Carbon Dioxide, CO2       Carbon Monoxide, CO          Water Vapor, H2O                  Oxygen, O2               Nitrogen, N2
           (h°f  169,300 Btu /lbmol)   (h°f  47,540 Btu /lbmol)  (h°f  104,040 Btu /lbmol)          (h°f  0 Btu /lbmol)      (h°f  0 Btu /lbmol)

        T  h       u           s°      h       u       s°        h       u       s°         h       u                    s°  h            u       s°   T

     1900  19,698  15,925      64.999  13,850  10,077  56.509    16,428  12,654  56.097     14,322  10,549  58.607           13,742   9,968  54.896   1900
     1940  20,224  16,372      65.272  14,170  10,318  56.677    16,830  12,977  56.307     14,658  10,806  58.782           14,058  10,205  55.061   1940
     1980  20,753  16,821      65.543  14,492  10,560  56.841    17,235  13,303  56.514     14,995  11,063  58.954           14,375  10,443  55.223   1980
     2020  21,284  17,273      65.809  14,815  10,803  57.007    17,643  13,632  56.719     15,333  11,321  59.123           14,694  10,682  55.383   2020
     2060  21,818  17,727      66.069  15,139  11,048  57.161    18,054  13,963  56.920     15,672  11,581  59.289           15,013  10,923  55.540   2060

     2100  22,353  18,182      66.327  15,463  11,293  57.317    18,467  14,297  57.119     16,011  11,841  59.451           15,334  11,164  55.694   2100
     2140  22,890  18,640      66.581  15,789  11,539  57.470    18,883  14,633  57.315     16,351  12,101  59.612           15,656  11,406  55.846   2140
     2180  23,429  19,101      66.830  16,116  11,787  57.621    19,301  14,972  57.509     16,692  12,363  59.770           15,978  11,649  55.995   2180
     2220  23,970  19,561      67.076  16,443  12,035  57.770    19,722  15,313  57.701     17,036  12,625  59.926           16,302  11,893  56.141   2220
     2260  24,512  20,024      67.319  16,722  12,284  57.917    20,145  15,657  57.889     17,376  12,888  60.077           16,626  12,138  56.286   2260

     2300  25,056  20,489      67.557  17,101  12,534  58.062    20,571  16,003  58.077     17,719  13,151  60.228           16,951  12,384  56.429   2300
     2340  25,602  20,955      67.792  17,431  12,784  58.204    20,999  16,352  58.261     18,062  13,416  60.376           17,277  12,630  56.570   2340
     2380  26,150  21,423      68.025  17,762  13,035  58.344    21,429  16,703  58.445     18,407  13,680  60.522           17,604  12,878  56.708   2380
     2420  26,699  21,893      68.253  18,093  13,287  58.482    21,862  17,057  58.625     18,572  13,946  60.666           17,932  13,126  56.845   2420
     2460  27,249  22,364      68.479  18,426  13,541  58.619    22,298  17,413  58.803     19,097  14,212  60.808           18,260  13,375  56.980   2460

     2500  27,801  22,837      68.702  18,759  13,794  58.754    22,735  17,771  58.980     19,443  14,479  60.946           18,590  13,625  57.112   2500
     2540  28,355  23,310      68.921  19,093  14,048  58.885    23,175  18,131  59.155     19,790  14,746  61.084           18,919  13,875  57.243   2540
     2580  28,910  23,786      69.138  19,427  14,303  59.016    23,618  18,494  59.328     20,138  15,014  61.220           19,250  14,127  57.372   2580
     2620  29,465  24,262      69.352  19,762  14,559  59.145    24,062  18,859  59.500     20,485  15,282  61.354           19,582  14,379  57.499   2620
     2660  30,023  24,740      69.563  20,098  14,815  59.272    24,508  19,226  59.669     20,834  15,551  61.486           19,914  14,631  57.625   2660

     2700  30,581  25,220      69.771  20,434  15,072  59.398    24,957  19,595  59.837     21,183  15,821  61.616           20,246  14,885  57.750   2700
     2740  31,141  25,701      69.977  20,771  15,330  59.521    25,408  19,967  60.003     21,533  16,091  61.744           20,580  15,139  57.872   2740
     2780  31,702  26,181      70.181  21,108  15,588  59.644    25,861  20,340  60.167     21,883  16,362  61.871           20,914  15,393  57.993   2780
     2820  32,264  26,664      70.382  21,446  15,846  59.765    26,316  20,715  60.330     22,232  16,633  61.996           21,248  15,648  58.113   2820
     2860  32,827  27,148      70.580  21,785  16,105  59.884    26,773  21,093  60.490     22,584  16,905  62.120           21,584  15,905  58.231   2860

     2900  33,392  27,633      70.776  22,124  16,365  60.002    27,231  21,472  60.650     22,936  17,177  62.242           21,920  16,161  58.348   2900
     2940  33,957  28,118      70.970  22,463  16,625  60.118    27,692  21,853  60.809     23,288  17,450  62.363           22,256  16,417  58.463   2940
     2980  34,523  28,605      71.160  22,803  16,885  60.232    28,154  22,237  60.965     23,641  17,723  62.483           22,593  16,675  58.576   2980
     3020  35,090  29,093      71.350  23,144  17,146  60.346    28,619  22,621  61.120     23,994  17,997  62.599           22,930  16,933  58.688   3020
     3060  35,659  29,582      71.537  23,485  17,408  60.458    29,085  23,085  61.274     24,348  18,271  62.716           23,268  17,192  58.800   3060

     3100  36,228  30,072      71.722  23,826  17,670  60.569    29,553  23,397  61.426     24,703  18,546  62.831           23,607  17,451  58.910   3100
     3140  36,798  30,562      71.904  24,168  17,932  60.679    30,023  23,787  61.577     25,057  18,822  62.945           23,946  17,710  59.019   3140
     3180  37,369  31,054      72.085  24,510  18,195  60.787    30,494  24,179  61.727     25,413  19,098  63.057           24,285  17,970  59.126   3180
     3220  37,941  31,546      72.264  24,853  18,458  60.894    30,967  24,572  61.874     25,769  19,374  63.169           24,625  18,231  59.232   3220
     3260  38,513  32,039      72.441  25,196  18,722  61.000    31,442  24,968  62.022     26,175  19,651  63.279           24,965  18,491  59.338   3260

     3300  39,087  32,533      72.616  25,539  18,986  61.105    31,918  25,365  62.167     26,412  19,928  63.386           25,306  18,753  59.442   3300
     3340  39,661  33,028      72.788  25,883  19,250  61.209    32,396  25,763  62.312     26,839  20,206  63.494           25,647  19,014  59.544   3340
     3380  40,236  33,524      72.960  26,227  19,515  61.311    32,876  26,164  62.454     27,197  20,485  63.601           25,989  19,277  59.646   3380
     3420  40,812  34,020      73.129  26,572  19,780  61.412    33,357  26,565  62.597     27,555  20,763  63.706           26,331  19,539  59.747   3420
     3460  41,338  34,517      73.297  26,917  20,045  61.513    33,839  26,968  62.738     27,914  21,043  63.811           26,673  19,802  59.846   3460
     TABLE A-23E (Continued)

                                                      T(R), h and u(Btu/lbmol), s°(Btu/lbmol # R)

               Carbon Dioxide, CO2    Carbon Monoxide, CO        Water Vapor, H2O                      Oxygen, O2               Nitrogen, N2
           (h°f  169,300 Btu /lbmol)                                                               (h°f  0 Btu /lbmol)      (h°f  0 Btu /lbmol)
                                      (h°f  47,540 Btu /lbmol) (h°f  104,040 Btu /lbmol)

        T  h       u          s°      h       u       s°      h       u            s°     h        u                    s°  h            u       s°   T

     3500  41,965  35,015     73.462  27,262  20,311  61.612  34,324  27,373  62.875      28,273   21,323  63.914           27,016  20,065  59.944   3500
     3540  42,543  35,513     73.627  27,608  20,576  61.710  34,809  27,779  63.015      28,633   21,603  64.016           27,359  20,329  60.041   3540
     3580  43,121  36,012     73.789  27,954  20,844  61.807  35,296  28,187  63.153      28,994   21,884  64.114           27,703  20,593  60.138   3580
     3620  43,701  36,512     73.951  28,300  21,111  61.903  35,785  28,596  63.288      29,354   22,165  64.217           28,046  20,858  60.234   3620
     3660  44,280  37,012     74.110  28,647  21,378  61.998  36,274  29,006  63.423      29,716   22,447  64.316           28,391  21,122  60.328   3660

     3700  44,861  37,513     74.267  28,994  21,646  62.093  36,765  29,418  63.557      30,078   22,730  64.415           28,735  21,387  60.422   3700
     3740  45,442  38,014     74.423  29,341  21,914  62.186  37,258  29,831  63.690      30,440   23,013  64.512           29,080  21,653  60.515   3740
     3780  46,023  38,517     74.578  29,688  22,182  62.279  37,752  30,245  63.821      30,803   23,296  64.609           29,425  21,919  60.607   3780
     3820  46,605  39,019     74.732  30,036  22,450  62.370  38,247  30,661  63.952      31,166   23,580  64.704           29,771  22,185  60.698   3820
     3860  47,188  39,522     74.884  30,384  22,719  62.461  38,743  31,077  64.082      31,529   23,864  64.800           30,117  22,451  60.788   3860

     3900  47,771  40,026     75.033  30,733  22,988  61.511  39,240  31,495  64.210      31,894   24,149  64.893           30,463  22,718  60.877   3900
     3940  48,355  40,531     75.182  31,082  23,257  62.640  39,739  31,915  64.338      32,258   24,434  64.986           30,809  22,985  60.966   3940
     3980  48,939  41,035     75.330  31,431  23,527  62.728  40,239  32,335  64.465      32,623   24,720  65.078           31,156  23,252  61.053   3980
     4020  49,524  41,541     75.477  31,780  23,797  62.816  40,740  32,757  64.591      32,989   25,006  65.169           31,503  23,520  61.139   4020
     4060  50,109  42,047     75.622  32,129  24,067  62.902  41,242  33,179  64.715      33,355   25,292  65.260           31,850  23,788  61.225   4060

     4100  50,695  42,553     75.765  32,479  24,337  62.988  41,745  33,603  64.839      33,722   25,580  65.350           32,198  24,056  61.310   4100
     4140  51,282  43,060     75.907  32,829  24,608  63.072  42,250  34,028  64.962      34,089   25,867  64.439           32,546  24,324  61.395   4140
     4180  51,868  43,568     76.048  33,179  24,878  63.156  42,755  34,454  65.084      34,456   26,155  65.527           32,894  24,593  61.479   4180
     4220  52,456  44,075     76.188  33,530  25,149  63.240  43,267  34,881  65.204      34,824   26,444  65.615           33,242  24,862  61.562   4220
     4260  53,044  44,584     76.327  33,880  25,421  63.323  43,769  35,310  65.325      35,192   26,733  65.702           33,591  25,131  61.644   4260

     4300  53,632  45,093     76.464  34,231  25,692  63.405  44,278  35,739  65.444      35,561   27,022  65.788           33,940  25,401  61.726   4300
     4340  54,221  45,602     76.601  34,582  25,934  63.486  44,788  36,169  65.563      35,930   27,312  65.873           34,289  25,670  61.806   4340
     4380  54,810  46,112     76.736  34,934  26,235  63.567  45,298  36,600  65.680      36,300   27,602  65.958           34,638  25,940  61.887   4380
     4420  55,400  46,622     76.870  35,285  26,508  63.647  45,810  37,032  65.797      36,670   27,823  66.042           34,988  26,210  61.966   4420
     4460  55,990  47,133     77.003  35,637  26,780  63.726  46,322  37,465  65.913      37,041   28,184  66.125           35,338  26,481  62.045   4460

     4500  56,581  47,645     77.135  35,989  27,052  63.805  46,836  37,900  66.028      37,412   28,475  66.208           35,688  26,751  62.123   4500
     4540  57,172  48,156     77.266  36,341  27,325  63.883  47,350  38,334  66.142      37,783   28,768  66.290           36,038  27,022  62.201   4540
     4580  57,764  48,668     77.395  36,693  27,598  63.960  47,866  38,770  66.255      38,155   29,060  66.372           36,389  27,293  62.278   4580
     4620  58,356  49,181     77.581  37,046  27,871  64.036  48,382  39,207  66.368      38,528   29,353  66.453           36,739  27,565  62.354   4620
     4660  58,948  49,694     77.652  37,398  28,144  64.113  48,899  39,645  66.480      38,900   29,646  66.533           37,090  27,836  62.429   4660

     4700  59,541  50,208     77.779  37,751  28,417  64.188  49,417  40,083  66.591      39,274   29,940  66.613           37,441  28,108  62.504   4700
     4740  60,134  50,721     77.905  38,104  28,691  64.263  49,936  40,523  66.701      39,647   30,234  66.691           37,792  28,379  62.578   4740
     4780  60,728  51,236     78.029  38,457  28,965  64.337  50,455  40,963  66.811      40,021   30,529  66.770           38,144  28,651  62.652   4780
     4820  61,322  51,750     78.153  38,811  29,239  64.411  50,976  41,404  66.920      40,396   30,824  66.848           38,495  28,924  62.725   4820
     4860  61,916  52,265     78.276  39,164  29,513  64.484  51,497  41,856  67.028      40,771   31,120  66.925           38,847  29,196  62.798   4860

     4900  62,511  52,781     78.398  39,518  29,787  64.556  52,019  42,288  67.135      41,146   31,415  67.003           39,199  29,468  62.870   4900
     5000  64,000  54,071     78.698  40,403  30,473  64.735  53,327  43,398  67.401      42,086   32,157  67.193           40,080  30,151  63.049   5000
     5100  65,491  55,363     78.994  41,289  31,161  64.910  54,640  44,512  67.662      43,021   32,901  67.380           40,962  30,834  63.223   5100
     5200  66,984  56,658     79.284  42,176  31,849  65.082  55,957  45,631  67.918      43,974   33,648  67.562           41,844  31,518  63.395   5200
     5300                                                                                                                                            5300
           68,471  57,954     79.569  43,063  32,538  65.252  57,279  46,754  68.172      44,922   34,397  67.743           42,728  32,203  63.563

811

                                                                                                                            Table A-23E
             812 Tables in English Units

             TABLE A-24E Constants for the van der Waals, Redlich­Kwong, and Benedict­Webb­Rubin Equations of State

             1. van der Waals and Redlich­Kwong: Constants for pressure in atm, specific volume in ft3/lbmol, and temperature in R

                                                                    van der Waals                                  Redlich­Kwong

                                                               a                      b                            a                      b
                                                                                      ft3                                                ft3
             Substance                                  atm a  ft3       2          lbmol              atm a  ft3       2              lbmol

             Air                                               lbmol   b            0.586                     lbmol   b 1°R212         0.4064
             Butane (C4H10)                                                         1.862                                              1.2903
             Carbon dioxide (CO2)                         345                       0.686                      5,409                   0.4755
                                                        3,509                                                 98,349
             Carbon monoxide (CO)                                                   0.632                     21,972                   0.4382
             Methane (CH4)                                926                       0.685                                              0.4751
             Nitrogen (N2)                                                          0.618                                              0.4286
Table A-24E                                                    372                                             5,832
             Oxygen (O2)                                       581                  0.509                     10,919                   0.3531
             Propane (C3H8)                                    346                  1.444                                              1.0006
             Refrigerant 12                                                         1.558                      5,280                   1.0796

                                                          349                                                  5,896
                                                        2,369                                                 61,952
                                                        2,660                                                 70,951

             Sulfur dioxide (SO2)                       1,738                       0.910                     49,032                   0.6309
             Water (H2O)                                1,400                       0.488                     48,418                   0.3380

             Source: Calculated from critical data.

             2. Benedict­Webb­Rubin: Constants for pressure in atm, specific volume in ft3/lbmol, and temperature in R

             Substance  a                            A              b       B              c                          C                  

             C4H10      7736.7            2587.6               10.26        1.9921         4.214  109         8.254  108        4.527  8.724
             CO2         562.3             702.4                1.850       0.7995         1.987  108         1.152  108        0.348  1.384
             CO          150.6             344.1                0.675       0.8737         1.385  107         7.118  106        0.555  1.540

             CH4        203.0             476.0                   0.867     0.6824         3.389  107         1.876  107        0.511  1.540
                                                                                                                                0.523  1.360
             N2         103.2             270.4                   0.597     0.6526         9.700  106         6.700  106

             Source: H. W. Cooper and J. C. Goldfrank, Hydrocarbon Processing, 46 (12): 141 (1967).
                                                                                Tables in English Units 813

TABLE A-25E Thermochemical Properties of Selected Substances at 537R and 1 atm

                                                                                                 Heating Values

Substance          Formula    Molar Mass,    Enthalpy of    Gibbs Function          Absolute     Higher,   Lower,                  Table A-25E
                              M (lb/lbmol)  Formation, h°f   of Formation,         Entropy, s°    HHV       LHV
Carbon             C(s)                      (Btu/lbmol)    g°f (Btu/ lbmol)    (Btu/lbmol # R)  (Btu/lb)  (Btu/lb)
Hydrogen           H2(g)          12.01
Nitrogen           N2(g)            2.016                0                0             1.36     14,100    14,100
Oxygen             O2(g)          28.01                  0                0            31.19     61,000    51,610
                                  32.00                  0                0            45.74
Carbon monoxide    CO(g)                                 0                0            48.98        --        --
Carbon dioxide     CO2(g)         28.01                                                             --        --
Water              H2O(g)         44.01        47,540           59,010                 47.27
Water              H2O(l)         18.02       169,300          169,680                 51.03        --        --
                                  18.02       104,040           98,350                 45.08        --        --
Hydrogen peroxide  H2O2(g)                    122,970          102,040                 16.71        --        --
Ammonia            NH3(g)         34.02                                                             --        --
Oxygen             O(g)           17.03        58,640           45,430                 55.60
Hydrogen           H(g)           16.00        19,750             7,140                45.97        --        --
                                    1.008       107,210            99,710              38.47        --        --
                                                                   87,460              27.39        --        --
                                                  93,780                                            --        --

Nitrogen           N(g)       14.01          203,340         195,970            36.61              --        --
Hydroxyl           OH(g)      17.01           16,790          14,750            43.92              --        --
Methane            CH4(g)     16.04         32,210          21,860              44.49            23,880    21,520
Acetylene          C2H2(g)    26.04           97,540          87,990            48.00            21,470    20,740

Ethylene           C2H4(g)    28.05           22,490          29,306            52.54            21,640    20,290
Ethane             C2H6(g)    30.07         36,420          14,150              54.85            22,320    20,430
Propylene          C3H6(g)    42.08                                             63.80            21,050    19,700
Propane            C3H8(g)    44.09             8,790         26,980            64.51            21,660    19,950
                                            44,680          10,105

Butane             C4H10(g)    58.12         54,270         6,760                74.11           21,300    19,670
Pentane            C5H12(g)    72.15         62,960         3,530                83.21           21,090    19,510
Octane             C8H18(g)   114.22         89,680                             111.55           20,760    19,270
Octane             C8H18(l)   114.22        107,530           7,110              86.23           20,610    19,110
Benzene            C6H6(g)     78.11                          2,840              64.34           18,180    17,460
                                                35,680       55,780

Methyl alcohol     CH3OH(g)   32.04          86,540         69,700              57.29            10,260     9,080
Methyl alcohol     CH3OH(l)   32.04         102,670         71,570              30.30             9,760     8,570
Ethyl alcohol      C2H5OH(g)  46.07         101,230         72,520              67.54            13,160    11,930
Ethyl alcohol      C2H5OH(l)  46.07         119,470                             38.40            12,760    11,530
                                                              75,240

Source: Based on JANAF Thermochemical Tables, NSRDS-NBS-37, 1971; Selected Values of Chemical Thermodynamic Properties, NBS Tech.
Note 270-3, 1968; and API Research Project 44, Carnegie Press, 1953. Heating values calculated.
Index to Figures and Charts

Figure A-1  Generalized compressibility chart, pR  1.0        814

Figure A-2  Generalized compressibility chart, pR  10.0       815

Figure A-3  Generalized compressibility chart, 10  pR  40     815

Figure A-4  Generalized enthalpy correction chart             816

Figure A-5  Generalized entropy correction chart              817

Figure A-6  Generalized fugacity coefficient chart            818

Figure A-7  Temperature­entropy diagram for water (SI units)  819

Figure A-8  Enthalpy­entropy diagram for water (SI units)     820

Figure A-9  Psychrometric chart for 1 atm (SI units)          821

                                    Figure A-1 Generalized compressibility chart, pR  1.0. Source: E. F. Obert, Concepts of
                                    Thermodynamics, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1960.

814
                                                                                                                                         Figures and Charts 815

Figure A-2 Generalized compressibility chart, pR  10.0. Source: E. F. Obert, Concepts of
Thermodynamics, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1960.

                Figure A-3 Generalized compressibility chart, 10  pR  40. Source: E. F. Obert. Concepts of
                Thermodynamics, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1960.
816 Figures and Charts

                  Figure A-4 Generalized enthalpy correction chart. Source: Adapted from G. J. Van Wylen
                  and R. E. Sonntag, Fundamentals of Classical Thermodynamics, 3rd. ed., English/SI, Wiley,
                  New York, 1986.
                                                                                                                     Figures and Charts 817

Figure A-5 Generalized entropy correction chart. Source: Adapted from G. J. Van
Wylen and R. E. Sonntag, Fundamentals of Classical Thermodynamics, 3rd. ed.,
English/SI, Wiley, New York, 1986.
818 Figures and Charts

                  Figure A-6 Generalized fugacity coefficient chart. Source: G. J. Van Wylen and R. E. Sonntag,
                  Fundamentals of Classical Thermodynamics, 3rd. ed., English/SI, Wiley, New York, 1986.
                                                                                                                     Figures and Charts 819

Figure A-7 Temperature­ entropy diagram for water (SI units). Source: J. H. Keenan, F. G. Keyes,
P. G. Hill, and J. G. Moore, Steam Tables, Wiley, New York, 1978.
820 Figures and Charts

                  Figure A-8 Enthalpy­entropy diagram for water (SI units). Source: J. B. Jones and G. A.
                  Hawkins, Engineering Thermodynamics, 2nd ed., Wiley, New York, 1986.
                                                                                                                                   Figures and Charts 821

Figure A-9 Psychrometric chart for 1 atm (SI units). Source: Z. Zhang and M. B. Pate, "A
Methodology for Implementing a Psychrometric Chart in a Computer Graphics System," ASHRAE
Transactions, Vol. 94, Pt. 1, 1988.
Answer to Selected Problems

1.10 2551                                          (c) subcooled (compressed)               4.25 25 bars
1.11 9.5, 98.1                                     liquid, (d) superheated vapor,
1.13 6.131                                         (e) solid                                4.28 10,400
1.14 3.92, 0.125                          3.8 1.36
1.16 29.62                                3.9 23.4                                          4.31 14.08 kW
1.18 68.67                                3.10 6.189
1.21 (a) 1.33, 0.67                       3.11 0.025                                        4.32 0.14
1.26 (a) 0.2, 2.67                        3.14 0.188, 10.5
1.27 58 (vacuum)                          3.16 140, 0.8520, 0.002                           4.36 15.98
1.28 decreases                            3.18 33.86, 153.13
1.29 A: 2.68, B: 1.28                     3.19 0.0296                                       4.40 56.1
1.30 0.8                                  3.24 73.4
1.32 1.893 Mpa, 14.73                     3.27 10.4, 32.31                                  4.42 (a) 3.673 kg/min
1.40 71.6                                 3.30 1.6386  103 m3/kg,                                    (b) 615.3 kJ/min
1.41 33.33, 166.67, 1.5                            274.26 kJ/kg
1.42 no                                   3.32 1751.1                                       4.46 18
2.2 97.8                                  3.34 2.392 kJ/kg, 20.23
2.3 4800                                  3.37 52.1, 42.0                                   4.53 54.7
2.4 (a) 56,520, 489,000 (b) 162.8         3.41 24, 239.8
2.6 210 kJ                                3.42 66.7, 105                                    4.61 143.5
2.7 (b) 32.57  104, 91.4                  3.45 49.3
                                                                                            4.64 (a) 47.4 kg
         (c) 0.5 m, 53.01                                                                #
2.16 0.02                                                                                   4.66 83.39
2.19 150, 100 k, 0.125                    3.47 mc1dTdt2  hA# 1T0  T 2  W ,
2.17 40                                          T 1t2  T0  1WhA2                           4.69 2.9, 1043
2.18 80.47                                       51  exp31hAmc2t4 6
2.20 1.843                                                                                  5.15 decrease TC
2.22 300, 9.42                            3.48 (a) 0.79 (b) 0.791
2.26 1.96                                 3.49 0.103                                        5.16 (a)  (TH  TC)2,
2.31 0.842                                3.50 7.88  103, 148                                        (b)  (THTC)12
2.33 0.064                                3.52 (a) 6.685 (b) 6.973
2.37 350 kJ                               3.57 460                                          5.17 (a) (1max)  1, (b) 1max
2.44 109.8                                3.62 425.6, 2.462
2.45 1.747                                3.64 297.9, 24.1, 1167.7, 0                       5.20 (a)  TCTH  T0
2.46 (a) 112.6 Kpa                        3.65 1.041                                                         THT0  TC
                                          3.69 (a) 252.4, (b) 245
         (b) 68.89 J                      4.3 35.3, 4.17                                    5.21 (a)  THż TH  TC, (b) TC 6 TH
         (c) 131.39 J                     4.4 tf  15.36                                                 THTHż  TCż     TCż THż
2.49 (b) 8.28 kJ (c) 18.78 kJ             4.8 0.3717, 6.095
         (d) 36.9 kJ                      4.10 5.04, 0.65                                   5.23 952
2.50 15 kJ, 30%                           4.14 0.73, 0.042
2.56 300 kJ, 200 kJ                       4.17 44.6                                         5.27 75
2.57 1.34 kW                              4.18 (a) 664.1, (b) 17, 6.2
3.1 (a) two-phase, liquid­vapor           4.20 25.3 kJ/kg                                   5.29 (a) 6.7%
         mixture, (b) superheated vapor,  4.22 319.6 K
                                          4.23 102.5                                        5.30 possible but uneconomical
822                                       4.24 7.53, 0.108
                                                                                            5.34 no

                                                                                            5.36 900

                                                                                            5.39 3.33, 0.41

                                                                                            5.40 no

                                                                                            5.46 (b) 1­2: 2914, 330, 2­3: 0,
                                                                                                     983.0, 3­4: 2140.2, 167.1,
                                                                                                     4­1: 0, 373.0, (c) 26.5

                                                                                            6.1 (a) 0.667, imp
                                                                                                     (b) 0, internally reversible
                                                                                                     (c) 0.667, possible,
                                                                                                     and irreversible

                                                                                            6.2 (a):  WR  W1
                                                                                                             TC
                                                                                                     #
                                                                                            6.6  Qs11  T0Ts211  T0Tu2

                                                                                            6.10 (a): W  mp(vg  vf), Q 
                                                                                                     m(hg  hf)

                                                                                            6.12 F, T, F, F
                                                                                       Answer to Selected Problems 823

6.15  (c):    QH     c1     TC         d           7.17 411.2, 339.2                   9.30 372.6, 833.3, 55.3
                            TH                     7.19 40.14, 13.42                   9.33 pressure ratio  8, t  c 

6.16 (b):  mc 3 TH  TC  21THTC212 4 7.25 1.87  104                                              80%, (a) 24.1%, (b) 0.582,
                                                                                                (c) 1271.9, (d) 186.6, 255.1
6.19 4.9128, 0.4337, 0.97515,                      7.28 0.481, 0.044                   9.36 pressure ratio  8, t  c 
         22.163                                    7.36 101.9                                   80%, (a) 36.4%, (b) 0.582,
                                                   7.43 21.6%, 0.9%                             (c) 1271.9, (d) 65.64
6.22 6.9, 4.12, 0.188                              7.48 173.3, 2.8                     9.40 (a) 365.68, 370.94, (b) 365.7,
6.24 25.224                                        7.54 $40,900/year                            (c) % increase  15.2
6.28 471.5, 2391.8                                 7.56 25.06, 27.73                   9.45 49.68, single stage: 60.11
6.29 (b): 153.81, 153.81                           7.62 5.6%                           9.53 (b) 1009 m/s
6.34 (b): 28.6, (c) 68.2%                          7.67 (a) 1927, 340.8, (b) 85%       9.55 1080
6.36 18.1%, 26.5%                                  7.70 382.9, 8.94  104, 45.9%        9.56 766.5, 1348
6.37 , 0, , , , indeterminate                      7.77 (b): Capital, 75%              9.57 10, 296.4
6.39   0: 56.20                                    7.80 (b): 0.59                      9.60 3635, 78.6, 0.214
6.41 no                                            8.1 (a) 4.01  105, 258.4  103,      9.62 (a) 4.19 (b) 69% (c) 5.89
6.45 no                                                                                9.63 37.95 (opposite to direction of flow)
6.49 .057 W/K                                               158.4  103, 38.7

6.52 436.7, 1.189, 0.428, 0.762                    8.6 921.6, 2339.5, 39.4, 1417.9     9.65 48.33

6.56 (a); 0.3709                                   8.10 25                             9.69 1007 N, 1.452 kW

6.60 0.59                                          8.11 24, 59.7, 1304.2, 990.9        9.73 inlet: 0.054, 340.2, 15.01

6.62 equal, less, greater,                         8.13 33.6, 3.38  105, 8.48  106            exit: 0.819, 340.2, 9.67
         indeterminate, greater
                                                   8.18 44.2                           9.76 (a) 418.2, 4.238

6.66 from right to left, 1741                      8.23 235  103, 42.5, 5.825  106            (b) 446.6, 4.456

6.71 12.75                                         8.29 1268.3, 47.6, 1394.1                  (c) 432, 4.344

6.74 1                                             8.30 1100.7, 41.4, 1558.3           9.79 (a) .4047, .5943

6.87 (a): 0.2223, 0.217                            8.31 2.43  105, 41.2, 6.14  106     9.84 (a) 1.81, (b) 2.87, (c) 461,
                                                   8.34 36.8, 1.17  106                         (d) 5.94  102
6.91 0.8146, 1.3394
                                                   8.36 1218.6, 45.6, 1453.8           10.1 25.8, 3.85, 151.94, 6.92
6.96  (a)     aV12       2kRT1                                                         10.2 7.251, 1.062, 6.83
                         k1                        8.37 1062.2, 39.7, 1610.1           10.3 2.21, 3.62, 5.75
                                                   8.39 43.18, 3.375  105              10.7 4.05, 15.51
                 p2    1k   12k      12            8.42 39.2, 1.1  106                 10.10 3.73, 3.4, 3.21, 0.71, 0.58
                                                                                       10.14 0.241, 5.647, 0.0606,
      c  1    a  p1  b           d  b              8.45 43.9
                                                   8.50 (a) 9.529  108, 236, 500,               6.227, 0.9743
6.99 354.8                                                                             10.16 6.61, 6.86, 2.61
                                                            3.032  109                 10.17 (a) 55.3, 10.7 (b) 44.66, 4.85
6.101 1020.5, 89.8%                                8.52 (a) 191  103 kW (b) 133.2 
                                                                                                (c) 3.57
6.104 809.7                                                 103 kW (c) 57.8  103 kW
                                                            (d) 69.7%
6.108 (a): 207.9, 0.0698

6.111 (b): 162.17, 30.66

6.114 (pump work/compressor work)                  9.1 721.12, 51.5%, 949.2, 2331 K    10.20 2.126, 7.055, 19.53
          0.34%

6.119 no                                           9.2 805.2, 57.5%, 1060 KPa, 2656 K 10.24 1.868, 1.687

6.120 629.7, 81.7                                  9.13 23.19, 2.19, 59.7%, 975        10.26 16.0, 43.86, 2.74, 6.75

7.2 (a) 542.27, (b) 12.51, (c) 21.94               9.14 22.01, 2.081, 65.7, 883        10.34 46.2, 60.48

7.5 (a) 17.86 (b) 3.53 (c) 3.04                    9.18 rc  1.5: 1301.5, 189.2, 297.5  11.1 125.29, 80.1, 79.5, 79.2,
                                                            59.4                                100
7.9   (b)     cpT0   c  T           1        T  d
                        T0                ln                                           11.2 79.5, 80.1, 79.5, 79.2, 79.35, 85.53
                                                   9.19 7.389, .543, 727.6
                                            T0

7.10 CO2                                           9.26 37.47, 14.26, 31.44, 20.29, 60.8 11.5 767.5, 1145.7, 1076.5

7.14 51, 711                                       9.27 pressure ratio  6: 37.7%,      11.11  b         vRż     2764
7.16 0, 153.6, 29.53                                        0.345, 2218.6
                                                                                                   vRż   18     vRż T  2
                                                                                                                       R
824 Answer to Selected Problems

11.16  p       RT              cons  tan t                     (b) C3H8, C2H6: 0.4, CH4: 0.2,    13.39 1,299, 202, 1.68
              vb                                               (c) 26.71
                                                                                                 13.41 45,720, 49,500

11.19 (a) positive, (b) zero, (c) negative              12.7 0.337, 4.84                         13.43 849,100, 46,810

11.22 p  RTv, s  R ln(vv)                               12.9 291.46, .3159                       13.47 89.2%, 10.8%
         c ln(TT)
                                                        12.11 3014, 8.485                        13.50 (a) 1859, 6.42 (b) .9985,
                                                                                                          5.343  106
11.27 271.3 K, 269.5 K                                  12.14 110.8, .0505

11.29 0.292                                             12.21 440.2, 6.295, 0.175                13.52 165.3

11.33 (a) 0.0424 bar, (b) 36.19C                        12.22 387, 3.628, 2510.3, 3010.3         13.57 (a) 800, 770 (b) 800, 792

11.36  cp  cv  R                                        12.24 234, 2.094                         13.59 8.18  105
11.39
       (a)       p2     c  R       3AR   d,             12.27 claim invalid                      13.64 (b): (a) 34,212, (b) 116,554,
                 RT        p        T4                                                                    (c) 51,756
                                                        12.29 15.5%

       (b)       R      ln p2        3AR          p1 4  12.30 no                                 13.68 (a) 544.5, (b) 546 Model 1 546.7
                          p1          T 4 3 p2
                                                        12.32 .00865, 2.0234                     13.74 (a) 275,364, (b) 226,105,
                                                                                                          (c) 49,259, (d) e  82.1%
11.44  b  1  1 a 0Zb ,                                  12.33 10.4
11.49        T Z 0T p
                                                        12.39 2.24, 228.1                        13.80 (a) 0, (b) 0.31, (c) 1.97

       k  1  1 a 0Zb                                    12.40 537.3, 0.1774                      14.3 (a) 5.018
             p Z 0p T
                                                        12.41 3.7%, 30.3, 0.022                  14.5 (a) 2.224, (b) 2.224,
       cp           kR     4       3Z2                  12.42 7.08, 3.3  103                              (c) 4.448
                    
                 k      1                               12.43 (a): 68%, 0.0182, 76.3             14.9 (b) 5.018

11.50                   R                               12.45 20, 68%                            14.16 (a) increase, (b) no change

       (b) 1  2a1v  b22RTv3,                            12.49 (a) 38.31, (b) .007.7              14.21  CO2: 0.528, CO: 0.472,
                                                                                                 14.25  O2: 0.736, N2: 3.76
                2                                       12.51 12.3, 0.0144 (removed)             14.30
                                                                                                 14.34  CO2: 45.54%, CO: 21.43%,
       (c) u2  u1  cv1T 2dT                                                                             O2: 33.04%

              ac 1  1 d                                 12.56 52%, 32                                   CO2: 2, H2O: 1.428, NO: 0.1134,
                 v2 v1                                                                                  O2: 0.9433, N2: 13.1033
                                                        12.58 (a) 81.8%, 14.4 (b) .048
11.54 no                                                                                                593,269
                                                        12.59 290.8, 11338

                    2a             abbd2                12.60 82.65, 28
                    bR              v
11.57  Tinv             c  1                            13.1 162                                 14.35 (a) 322,386, 31,816
11.66
11.71         2     dB                   d1TRB2         13.5 (b) 8.25, 12.05                     14.37 (a) 139.18, (b) 139.66
              R     dTR                   dTR
           T     a         b  pR,    pR                 13.8 SO2: 0.029 kg/kg(O2)                14.39 108%
                                                        13.11 0.116, 9.777
       29.7                                                                                      14.40 4.04

11.75 349.7 (table: 369.8)                              13.14 0.038                              14.42 4.89

11.79 221.7, 148.5, 166.9                               13.17 C: 7.0322, H: 15.61, 1.361         14.44 Est.: 278,100

11.80 0.031                                             13.18  (b) 9.19, (c) CO2: .15, CO: 0.1,  14.48 0.84
                                                        13.19  N2: .75
11.85 0.1125, 0.1163                                    13.23                                    14.52 0.015
                                                               (c) CO2: 5.54%, CO: 11.09%,
11.88 95.1, 1.96                                               N2: 83.37%                        14.54  CO2: 0.28808, H2O: 0.71105,
                                                                                                 14.59  CO: 0.71192, O2: 0.000435,
11.94 101.1                                                    115%, 51                                 H2: 0.28895

11.98 18.2, 6.37                                        13.26 (b) CO: 5991, SO2: 666                    0.072%
                                                        13.29 1.269 (rich)
12.3 (a) N2: 50.61%, CO2: 39.76%;                                                                14.65 (a) 3, (b) 4, (c) 5
         O2: 9.64%, (b) N2: 0.06, CO2:
         0.03, O2: 0.01, (c) 37.3                       13.31 2.19  106

12.4 (a) C3H8: 0.5365, C2H6: 0.3659,                    13.34 0.037
         CH4: 0.0976,
                                                        13.37 82,670
Index

Absolute entropy, 648­651, 653, 655, 657,       Base unit, 8, 9, 18, 41                         Closed feedwater heaters, 350, 352
      661, 670                                  Beattie-Bridgeman equation of state, 493        Closed system:
                                                Benedict-Webb-Rubin equation of state, 493
Absolute pressure, 12, 99, 102                                                                     Definition, 3
Absolute temperature scale, 191                       table of constants, 762, 812                 energy balance for, 48­58
Absorption refrigeration cycle, 469             Bernoulli equation, 255                            entropy balance for, 220­222, 652
Acid rain, 329                                  Berthelot equation of state, 490                   exergy balance for, 283­285
Activity, 547, 548, 646, 694, 695               Binary vapor power cycle, 356                   Coefficient of performance:
Additive pressure, rule of, 532, 533, 535,      Biomass, 371                                       heat pump cycle, 61, 184, 188,
                                                Boiler, 149, 197, 198, 310, 311, 312, 313,
      536, 545, 564                                                                                      190, 192
Additive volume, rule of, 533, 546, 564               314, 325, 326, 327, 328, 329, 330, 331,      maximum for two reservoirs, 192­196
Adiabatic engine,                                     332, 333, 334, 335, 337, 338, 339, 340,      refrigeration cycles, 60, 189, 456
Adiabatic Flame temperature, 641, 642,                343, 346, 352, 356, 357, 358, 359, 360,   Coefficient of volume expansion, 514
                                                      361, 362, 363                             Cogeneration, 308, 310, 311, 312, 313, 315,
      643, 645, 669, 695                        Boltzmann's constant, 231
Adiabatic Process, 14, 45, 196, 197, 198,       Bore (of cylinder), 373, 374                          356, 357, 358, 365, 519, 647
                                                Boundary, 4                                     Combined cycle, 399, 419, 420, 421, 424,
      218, 224, 226                             Brayton cycle, 389, 390, 391, 392, 393, 394,
Adiabatic-saturation temperature, 588, 589,           395, 397, 399, 401, 404, 405, 444, 445,         467, 667
                                                      454, 474, 478, 479                        Combustion,
      590, 593
Adiabatic wall, 14                              Capacity, refrigeration, 458                       air for, 632, 633, 642
Afterburner, 415                                Capillary tube, 15                                 complete, 620, 649, 669
Air                                             Carnahan-Starling-Desantis equation of state,      products of, 620, 645, 649, 669
                                                                                                Compressed liquids, see Liquids
   atmospheric, 560, 609                              550, 554                                  Compressibility:
   for combustion, 272                          Carnot corollaries, 186, 187, 190, 193             isentropic, 513­515
   dry air, approximate composition of, 560     Carnot cycle, 196, 197, 198, 199, 218, 335,        isothermal, 513­515
   excess, 404, 623, 624, 625, 628, 669                                                         Compressibility chart, 94, 95, 96, 97, 98, 99,
   ideal gas properties of, 756                       336, 425, 426, 456, 472
   moist air, 603, 604, 606                        engine, 199                                        101, 110, 141, 147, 488, 491, 493, 533,
   percent of theoretical, 623, 627                heat pump, 198, 199, 200, 201                      535
   saturated, 580                                  power, 197, 198, 199                         Compressibility factor, 94, 95, 96, 99, 100,
   theoretical (stoichiometric), 622, 645          refrigeration, 198, 199                            102, 114, 487, 488, 490, 491, 524, 525,
Aircraft engines, 137, 418                      Carnot efficiency, 192, 193, 194, 196                 528, 532, 533, 535, 543
Air-fuel ratio, 622                             Cascade cycles, 467, 468, 479, 480              Compressible flow, 373, 426, 427, 429, 430,
Air-standard analysis                           Cavitation, 271                                       437, 444
   for gas turbines, 388                        Celsius (Centigrade) temperature scale, 18, 19  Compressible flow functions, table of, 437,
   for internal combustion engines, 373         Chemical equilibrium, 7, 558, 648, 652, 679,          438
Air-standard cycles:                                                                            Compression ratio, 374, 377, 378, 379, 382,
   Brayton cycle, 389­390                             683, 684, 687, 695, 696, 700, 706, 711          383, 384, 386, 444, 445
   Diesel cycle, 381­383                        Chemical exergy, 620, 655, 656, 657, 658,       Compression with intercooling, 404, 406,
   dual cycle, 385­388                                                                                407, 408, 425, 444, 445, 467, 468, 479,
   Otto cycle, 375­379                                659, 660, 661, 662, 663, 664, 665, 666,         480
Air-water vapor mixtures, 558, 579­580,               667, 668, 669, 670                        Compressor, 247, 306, 389
                                                Chemical potential, 539, 540, 547, 548, 681,       isentropic efficiency of, 247­249, 252
      587, 611                                        682, 683, 685, 687, 694, 706, 707, 708,   Condenser, 2, 144, 145, 148, 149, 198, 238,
Allotropic transformation, 120                        709, 710, 711                                   239, 240, 302, 303, 326, 327, 328, 329,
Amagat model, 562, 564, 611                        as escaping tendency, 707                          330, 331, 333, 334, 335, 337, 338, 340,
Ammonia, properties of, 76, 81, 82, 84, 85,        for ideal gas mixtures, 547, 548                   341, 342, 344, 346, 348, 349, 350, 351,
                                                   for ideal solutions, 547, 548                      352, 353, 354, 356, 357, 358, 359, 360,
      211, 356, 465, 469, 470, 471, 663, 664,      for pure substance, 682, 683                       363, 364, 365, 366, 419, 421, 423, 424,
      710                                       Chlorofluorocarbon (CFC) compounds,                   455, 456, 457, 458, 459, 460, 461, 462,
Area interpretation, 38, 218                          120, 465                                        463, 464, 466, 467, 468, 469, 470, 471,
Atkinson cycle, 446                             Choked flow, 433, 434, 444                            472, 473, 610
Atmospheric air, 175, 388, 560, 609, 610        Clapeyron equation, 504, 505, 506, 507, 520,    Conduction, energy transfer by, 20, 45, 46,
Atmospheric Pressure, standard, 12                    521, 548, 705, 706                              55, 62, 184
Atomic and molecular weights, table of, 719,    Clausius, inequality of, 177, 206­208, 220,     Conservation of Energy, 18, 20, 29, 32, 33,
      767                                             506, 706                                        49, 58, 59, 62, 121, 128, 129, 174, 175,
Availability, see Exergy                        Clausius-Clapeyron equation, 706                      187, 188, 228, 254, 326, 327, 351, 358,
                                                Clausius statement of the second law, 177             359, 564, 587, 589, 620, 629, 631,
Back pressure, 432, 433, 434, 435, 438, 439,       equivalence with Kelvin-Planck                     633, 635, 637, 639, 642, 648, 679,
      441, 442, 444, 445                                                                              684
                                                         statement, 200
Back work ratio, 329, 331, 332, 333, 356, 390,
      392, 393, 394, 397, 399, 403, 412, 414

                                                                                                825
826 Index

Conservation of mass, 20, 121, 122, 123, 124,     Disorder, 230, 231                               Enthalpy:
      125, 127, 133, 153, 162, 174, 209, 232,     Dissociation, 620, 645, 693, 694, 695,              approximation using saturated liquid data,
      236, 272, 327, 330, 347, 358, 361, 365,                                                               92, 93
      426, 428, 431, 566, 587, 589, 590, 594,           696, 700                                      change upon mixing, 568
      598, 599, 601, 605, 610, 612, 620, 623,     District heating, 358                               of combustion, 638­641
      624, 626, 627, 628, 629, 642, 684, 689,     Dry-bulb temperature, 590, 591, 592, 593,           definition, 83
      690, 693, 703, 704                                                                              departure, 524­526
                                                        597, 598, 602, 603, 604, 607                  of formation, 630, 631, 633, 636
Constant-pressure, specific heat, 74, 101, 110,   Dry compression, 456, 457                           of ideal gas, 103, 112
      112, 243, 336, 381, 385, 386, 407, 415,     Dry product analysis, 625, 626                      of ideal gas mixtures,
      521                                         Dual cycle, 375, 385, 386, 387, 444, 468            of ideal solutions,
                                                                                                      of incompressible substances, 93
Constant-volume, specific heat, 16, 17, 18,       Economics, engineering economics, 20,               of moist air, 603
      112, 191, 243, 375, 376, 381, 385, 386,           28, 309                                       of reaction, 700
      425, 680                                                                                        reference states and reference values, 84,
                                                  Effectiveness, 303, 306, 307, 308, 400, 401,              85
Constraints, design, 19, 149, 178, 240                  402, 403, 405, 412, 413, 425                  stagnation (total), 430, 431
Continuum hypothesis, 10
Control mass, 3                                      compressors, 307                              Enthalpy correction chart, generalized,
Control surface, 3, 4, 130, 134                      heat exchanger, 308                                 524­526
Control volume:                                      regenerator, 400
                                                     pumps, 308                                    Enthalpy-entropy diagram, 212, 240
   definition, 3                                     turbine, 306                                        for water, 582
   energy balance for, 121, 128­131, 162          Efficiency:
   entropy balance for, 231­240                      Carnot, 192                                   Entropy:
   exergy balance for, 293­303                       exergetic, 302­309                               absolute, 210­212, 648
   mass balance for, 123­125                         isentropic compressor, 246, 248                  of air-water vapor mixtures, 582, 611
   momentum equation for, 426­427                    isentropic nozzle, 246                           approximation using saturated liquid data,
Convection, energy transfer by, 46                   isentropic pump, 246, 248                              211, 212
Cooling tower, 326, 579, 609, 610, 612               isentropic turbine, 246                          Boltzmann relation for, 231
Corresponding states, principles of, 96, 97          rational, 324                                    change upon mixing, 546, 573
Cost:                                                second law, 303­307                              definition, 209
   annualized, 28, 309                               thermal, 60                                      departure, 528, 529
   capital, 309­310                               Elastic systems, simple, 70                         and disorder, 230­231
   fuel, 309­310                                  Electricity:                                        general comments, 210
   owning and operating, 310­315                                                                      of ideal gas, 213­215
   total, 310                                           off-peak, 172, 371                            of ideal gas mixtures, 546
   unit, 196, 305                                       peak demand, 172, 371                         of incompressible substances, 213, 214
Critical constants, 97                            Electric power, expression for, 4, 41, 57, 146,     principle of increase of, 228­229
   table of, 719                                        147, 293, 309, 329, 420, 645, 647             production, 181, 221­224
Critical point, 71, 72, 73, 79, 212, 489,         Electronic cooling, 2, 172                          of reacting systems, 648, 649
                                                  Emissivity, 46                                      transfer, 218, 221­223, 231­233
      490, 491                                    Endothermic reactions, 645
Critical Pressure in nozzel, 72, 74, 75, 96, 97,  Energy:                                          Entropy balance:
                                                  conservation of, 18, 20, 32, 33, 49, 58, 59,        for closed systems, 220­222, 652
      100, 341, 433, 439, 488, 489, 491,                129, 679, 684                                 for control volumes, 231, 232,
      524, 532                                       internal, 43                                     for reacting systems, 649
Cryogenic refrigeration,2, 646                       kinetic, 29, 30, 43, 44, 48
Cutoff ratio, 382, 383, 384                          potential, 29, 31                             Entropy correction chart, generalized,
Cycle, thermodynamic, 5                              solar, 67, 189, 202, 204                            524­526
                                                     total, of a system, 43
Dalton model, 545, 562, 563, 611, 612                transfer, 143                                 Environment, exergy reference, 273­275, 655,
Dead State, 275, 276, 277, 278, 282, 285,         Energy balance:                                        656, 657, 659­664
                                                     for closed systems, 48­58
      286, 290                                       for control volumes, 121, 128­131,            Equations of state
Deaeration, 352                                                                                       Beattie-Bridgeman, 493
Dehumidification, 594, 598, 599, 612                       162                                        Benedict-Webb-Rubin, 493
Density, 10­13                                       for psychrometric systems, 579,                     table of constants, 762, 812
Design, 1, 5, 19, 20                                 for reacting systems, 631­635                    Berthelot, 490
Dessicant dehumidification, 619                   Engineering design, 18, 19, 22, 325                 Carnahan-Starling-Desantis, 550, 554
Dew point, 583, 584, 585, 586, 587, 592, 598,     Engineering model, 20                               ideal gas, 100, 101, 113
                                                  Engines:                                            Redlich-Kwong, 490-493
      611, 612, 625, 626, 627, 636                   Adiabatic, 452                                      table of constants, 762, 812
Differentials, exact vs. inexact,, 35, 49, 223,      Carnot, 205                                      van der Waals, 488, 489
                                                     internal combustion, 374, 375,                      table of constants, 762, 812
      494, 495, 497, 498, 499, 500, 515, 548         turbojet, 414, 415, 416                          virial, 99, 488
Diesel cycle, 381, 382, 383, 385, 386                Stirling, 426
Diffuser, 134, 135, 183, 414, 415, 416, 417,      English engineering units, 10                    Equilibrium:
                                                                                                      chemical, 7, 648, 652, 679, 684­686
      418, 430, 432, 434, 443                                                                         criteria for, 7, 679­681, 711
Dimensions, 8, 9, 56, 134, 491
Displacement volume, 374, 375, 380
                                                                                                     Index 827

   definition, 7                                   Flow work, 130, 135, 144, 152, 157, 290,          Heat engine, see Power cycle
   flame temperature, 695, 696                           291, 292, 293, 294, 595                     heat exchanger, 134, 143, 144, 162, 296, 297,
   mechanical, 7, 655, 664, 679
   multicomponent, multiphase, 679, 681            Flowmeter, 172                                          298, 302, 307, 308, 309, 310, 326, 327,
   phase, 7, 679­682, 704­706                      Fluidized bed combustion, 329                           328, 340, 346, 356, 358, 359, 360, 361,
   reaction, equation of, 684­686                  Fluid mechanics, 1, 11, 125, 162, 255, 309, 427         362, 388, 389, 390, 391, 392, 393, 395,
   state, 7                                        Flywheel, 185                                           396, 398, 399, 400, 401, 402, 405, 406,
   test for, 7                                     Fourier's law, 45, 46                                   413, 419, 420, 421, 422, 423, 424, 456,
   thermal, 7, 655, 664                            Freon-12, see Refrigerant                               459, 467, 468, 469, 470, 473, 474, 475,
   thermodynamic, 7, 679, 681                      Friction, 52, 58, 176, 180, 181, 182, 183,              476, 477, 478, 479, 645
Equilibrium constant:                                                                                Heat index, 619
   for ideal gas mixtures, 687­692                       222, 225, 228, 240, 252, 298, 302,          Heat islands, 189
   for ideal solutions, 694                              362, 375, 396                               Heat pump, 60­62, 471­473
                                                   Fuel-air ratio, 622, 623                             air source, 472, 473
      table of, 765                                Fuel cells, 2, 519, 645, 646, 647, 667, 670, 685     Carnot cycle, 472, 473
Equivalence ratio, 623                             Fuels, 646, 647                                      vapor-compression, 472, 473
Ericsson cycle, 425, 426                           Fugacity                                          Heat rate, 328
Evaporative cooling, 604, 606, 612                    of ideal solutions, 545, 546                   Heat recovery steam generator, 150,
Evaporator, 148, 238, 240, 455, 456, 457,             multicomponent systems, 541­545                      302, 309
                                                   Fundamental thermodynamic function, 497,          Heat transfer coefficient, 47, 54, 55, 56
      458, 459, 460, 461, 462, 463, 464, 466,            503, 520, 521, 540, 541, 548                   table of typical values, 47
      467, 468, 469, 470, 471, 472, 473               use in developing property tables, 466, 710    Heating values, 638, 639, 640, 661
Exact differentials, 35, 497, 498, 500, 548                                                          Helmholtz function, definition, 498
      test for exactness, 494                      Gage pressure, 12                                    use in developing steam tables, 522­524
Excess air, 404, 623, 624, 625, 628, 669           Gas chromatograph, 625                            HFCs (hydrofluorocarbons), 465
Exergy (Availability):                             Gas constant, universal, 94, 95, 215, 493         Higher Heating values, 638, 639, 640, 661
   analysis, general comments, 272, 273, 283       Gas turbine                                       Humid air turbine (HAT) cycle, 619
   chemical, 620, 655­659                                                                            Humidification, 594, 601, 602, 612
   definition, 273                                    air-standard analysis, 387, 389                Humidity ratio (specific humidity), 581
   destruction, 273, 283, 284, 285                    with intercooling, 404­ 406                    Hybrid electric vehicle, 31
   evaluation of, 295                                 open to atmosphere, 389                        Hydrocarbon fuels, 620, 621, 625, 641,
   flow exergy, 664­666                               for propulsion, 414­ 418                             663, 670
   reference environment for, 273­275, 278,           regenerative, 399­402                          Hydroelectric, 293, 325, 685
                                                      with reheat, 404­406                           Hydrogen economy, 685
         655, 656, 659, 660                           steam-injected, 452, 619                       Hygrometer, 582
   standard chemical, 659­664                      Generalized charts                                Hypersonic, 429
   thermomechanical, 278, 655­657, 664                compressibility, 94­97, 490, 491, 493,
   transfer, 283­285,                                 enthalpy correction, 524­531                   Ice point, 18, 19
Exergy analysis:                                      entropy correction, 524­531                    Ideal gas:
   reacting systems, 667­670                          fugacity, 695
   vapor power plant, 359, 360                     Gibbs-Duhem equation, 540, 541, 556                  enthalpy, 103, 112
Exergy balance:                                    Gibbs function:                                      entropy, 213­215
   for closed systems, 283, 284                       definition, 498                                   equation of state, 100, 101, 113
   for control volumes, 293, 303                      of formation, 654, 658                            internal energy, 100, 101, 105
Exothermic reactions, 630, 631                        of ideal gas mixture, 683, 684                    model, definition of, 70, 91, 94
Extensive Property, 6, 31, 32, 43, 62, 129,           partial molal, 539, 711                           polytropic process of, 243, 256
                                                   Gibbs phase rule, 706, 709, 710, 711                 specific heat relations, 103­105
      209, 228, 229, 230, 231, 257, 277, 278,      Global warming, 84, 626                              tables of properties of, 756, 758,
      315, 536, 537, 538, 681                      Gravimetric analysis, 559, 560, 561
Extent of reaction, 686                            Gravitational potential energy, 32, 33, 43,                806, 808
External combustion engines, 426                                                                     Ideal gas mixtures
External irreversibility, 469                            48, 62
                                                                                                        chemical potential for, 547, 548
Fahrenheit temperature scale, 18                   Head loss, 271                                    Ideal solutions, 546, 547, 548, 695
Fanno line, 436                                    Heat:                                             Inclined manometer, 13, 27
Feedwater heater, 125, 143, 346, 347, 348,                                                           Incomplete combustion, 645, 670, 695
                                                      capacity, see Specific heat                    Incompressible substance, 92, 93, 94, 213,
      349, 350, 351, 352, 354, 356                    definition, 14
First law of Thermodynamics, 30, 32, 34, 36,          energy transfer by, 44­48                            217, 230
                                                      entropy transfer accompanying, 218,            Increase of entropy, principle of, 228, 229,
      38, 40, 42, 44, 46, 48, 50, 52, 54, 56, 58,
      60, 62, 64, 66, 68                                    221, 222                                       230, 285, 680
Flame temperature                                     exergy transfer accompanying, 284,             Independent Property, 70, 151
   adiabatic, 641, 642, 643, 645                                                                     Inequality of Clausius, 177, 206­208, 220,
   equilibrium, 695, 696                                    285, 286
Flash chamber, 469                                    flux, 45                                             506, 706
Flow exergy, 290, 291, 292, 293, 295, 296,            sign convention, 45, 47                        Inexact differential, 35
      297, 298, 306, 307, 315, 664, 665, 666          transfer modes, 45­ 47                         Infrared analyzer, 625
                                                      waste, 308                                     Intake stroke, 374
828 Index

Intensive Property, 6, 10, 14, 42, 43, 69, 75,    Kay's rule, 532, 533, 534, 535, 536, 548         Mole fraction, 559­562
      281, 429, 539, 682, 710                     Kelvin-Planck statement of the second law,       Mollier diagram,, 212, 246, 247, 504, 582

Intercepts, method of, 537, 538, 548                    178, 179                                         for water, 582
Intercooling, compression with, 404, 405,            analytical expression of, 184, 185            Momentum equation for control
                                                     equivalence with Clausius statement, 188,
      406, 407, 408, 409, 410, 411, 412, 413,                                                            volumes, 451­452
      414, 424, 425, 444, 445, 467, 468, 469,              189                                     Montreal Protocols, 120
      479, 480                                       interpretation for cycles, 207, 218
internal combustion Engines, 280, 308, 325,       Kelvin temperature scale, 190, 191, 199          Natural gas, 3, 272, 303, 313, 420, 454, 469,
      373, 374, 375, 378, 385, 391, 426, 444,     Kinetic energy, 22, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 43, 44,        621, 628, 646
      622, 645, 667
   nomenclature, 375                                    48, 52, 132, 135, 137, 138, 139, 141,      Natural Refrigerant, 84
internal Energy                                         142, 143, 147, 148, 247, 251, 252, 276,    Newton's law of cooling, 47, 56
   approximation using saturated liquid                 416, 417, 431, 693                         Newton's second law of motion, 30
                                                  Kinetic theory, 104                              Normal shock, 430, 434, 435, 436, 440, 441,
         data, 101
   change upon mixing, 43, 44                     Laminar flow, 164                                      442, 443, 444, 445
   general comments, 43                           Lewis-Randall rule, 545, 546                        table of functions, 441
   of ideal gas, 100, 101, 105                    Linear interpolation, 77, 78, 114, 572           Normal stress, 11, 40, 42
   of incompressible substances, 93­101           Liquids:                                         Nozzle,
   microscopic interpretation of, 44                                                                  choked flow,, 433, 434, 444
Internal irreversibility, 337, 461                   compressed (subcooled), 74                       converging,
internally reversible Process, 184, 197, 198,        incompressible model for, 92                     converging-diverging,
                                                     saturated, 92, 93, 94                            isentropic efficiency, 246
      199, 208, 209, 213, 214, 217, 218, 219,     Lithium bromide absorption cycle, 470            Nuclear power, 28, 68
      220, 221, 225, 287, 330, 334, 354, 376,     Log mean temperature difference, 68
      381, 425, 455                               Lower heating value, 639, 640                    Ocean thermal energy conversion
International System of Units, see SI units       Low-head dam, 172                                (OTEC), 271
International Temperature Scale, 191, 192                                                          One-dimensional flow, 121, 124, 125, 126,
Interpolation, 77, 78, 114, 191, 211, 241, 251,   Mach number, 426, 427, 429, 432, 433, 434,
      253, 281, 332, 362, 382, 461, 572, 585,           437, 438, 439, 440, 441, 442, 443, 444           129, 162, 290, 292, 294, 426, 427, 433,
      587, 644, 691                                                                                      435, 444, 595
Inversion states, 518                             Macroscopic viewpoint, 5                         Open feedwater heater, 143, 346, 348, 349,
Ionization, 625, 646, 695, 700, 701               Magnetic systems, simple, 70                           352, 354
Irreversibilities, 179, 180, 181, 183, 184, 185,  Manometer, 13, 16                                Open system, see Control volume 4
      186, 189, 196, 199, 207, 208, 220, 221,     Mass,                                            Optical Pyrometer, 16
      222, 223, 224, 226, 227, 228, 232, 233,                                                      Orsat analyzer, 625
      234, 237, 240, 245, 246, 247, 249, 253,        units for, 8­10                               Otto cycle, 375, 376, 377, 378, 379, 381, 382,
      254, 255, 257, 273, 274, 277, 283, 284,     Mass balance, 123, 125, 131, 149, 152, 594,            383, 386
      285, 288, 289, 290, 294, 298, 302, 303,                                                      Optimization, 19, 310, 312, 407, 661, 666
      304, 308, 311, 315, 327, 329, 330, 336,           598, 606, 608, 610
      337, 338, 340, 344, 345, 349, 358, 365,     Mass flow rate, 122­124                          Partial molal properties, 536, 537, 539, 548
      375, 391, 396, 397, 399, 406, 411, 415,     Mass flux, 125                                   Partial pressure, 544, 545, 563, 566, 567, 568,
      420, 425, 444, 454, 458, 459, 463, 464,     Mass fraction, 559, 560, 561, 562, 566, 581,
      465, 474, 476, 477, 478, 479, 645, 646,                                                            570, 572, 576, 578, 580, 581, 582, 583,
      657, 660, 667, 680                                611, 612, 621                                    584, 585, 586, 588, 590, 592, 596, 597,
Irreversibility, see Exergy destruction           Maxwell relations, 497, 499, 500, 501, 504,            598, 601, 605, 606, 611, 627, 649, 651,
Irreversible process, 180, 182, 184, 224, 436,                                                           652, 653, 654, 656, 658, 660, 683, 707,
      459, 681                                          541, 548                                         708, 709
Isentropic compressibility, 513, 514, 515, 517    Mean effective pressure, 375, 379, 380, 383,     Partial volume, 564
Isentropic efficiency                                                                              Peak demand, 172, 371
   compressor, 246, 248                                 384, 388                                   Peng-Robinson equation of state
   nozzle, 246                                    Mechanical equilibrium, 278, 655, 664, 679       Perfect gas, see Ideal gas
   pump, 246, 248                                 Melting, 71, 75, 76, 192, 504, 505, 506          Perpetual motion machine, 204, 205
   turbine, 246                                   MEMS, (microelectromechanical systems),          Phase
Isentropic process, 218, 240                                                                          change, 71, 73, 74, 75, 198, 214, 341, 504,
   ideal gas relations for, 240­245                     134
Isolated system, 231, 280, 282, 285               Method of intercepts, 537, 538                            505, 506, 548
Isothermal compressibility, 514, 515, 517         Methodology for solving problems, 330, 333          diagram, 71, 72, 73, 76, 77, 496, 506
Isothermal process, 14, 196, 198, 218, 426        Micromachines, 270                                  equilibrium, 708, 709, 711
                                                  Microscopic viewpoint, 41, 100, 230                 rule, Gibbs, 679, 706, 709, 710, 711
JANAF tables, 717, 761, 765                       Microturbines, 519                               Photovoltaic cell, 371
Jet engine, 2, 414, 415, 416, 426, 479            Mixtures:                                        Piezoelectric effect, 13
Joule's experiments, 44, 48                                                                        Pinch analysis (technology), 324
Joule-Thompson coefficient, 518, 519                 ideal gas, 611, 683, 684                      Planck's equation, 191
                                                     ideal solutions, 536, 546                     Polytropic process, 41, 271
                                                     p-v-T relations for, 611
                                                  Model, engineering, 20                                 of an ideal gas, 112­114, 243, 256
                                                  Moist air, 603, 604                              Potential energy, 29, 31, 32
                                                  Molar (volumetric) analysis, 559, 564
                                                  Molar basis, 10, 11
                                                  Molecular weight,
                                                     table of values, 719, 767
                                                                                                    Index 829

Power,                                                  test for, 5, 38                                gas systems, 454, 479
   electrical, 3, 56                                    thermometric, 14, 15, 16                       magnetic, 486
   transmitted by a shaft, 41, 56                 pseudoreduced specific volume, 97, 242, 490,         multistage compression with intercooling,
                                                        491, 492
Power cycle, 59, 60                               Psychrometer, 590, 591, 593                                404, 406­411
Pressure:                                         Psychrometric chart, 592, 593, 597, 598, 599,        steam jet, 482
                                                        600, 601, 602, 603, 604, 606, 607, 608,        thermoelectric, 68
   absolute, 12, 99, 102                                611, 612                                       ton of, 458
   atmospheric, standard, 12                      Pump,                                                vapor-compression, 457, 458
   critical, 72, 74, 75, 96, 97, 100                 isentropic efficiency, 246, 248                Regelation of ice, 556
   critical, in nozzle, 341, 433, 439, 488, 489,  Pure substance, 6, 7, 69, 70, 71, 73, 74, 503,    Regeneration:
                                                        546, 682, 705                                  Ericsson cycle, 425, 426
         491, 524, 532                            Pyrometer, optical, 16                               in gas refrigeration, 473, 474
   definition, 8, 11                                                                                   in gas turbines, 399­401
   gage, 12                                       Quality, definition, 14, 75, 78, 79, 80, 81, 83,     Stirling cycles, 196, 424, 425, 426, 444, 445
   mean effective, 375, 376                             86, 89, 90, 91, 138, 139, 144, 145, 148,    Regenerator, 399, 400­ 405, 411­413, 419, 425
   partial,, 544, 545, 563, 566, 567, 568, 570,         149, 150, 151, 153, 154, 210, 211, 212,        Effectiveness, 400­404
                                                        213, 238, 241, 331, 340, 342, 343, 349,     Reheat:
         572, 576, 578, 580, 581, 582, 583,             354, 456, 464, 469, 585, 587                   in gas turbines, 404, 405
         584, 585, 586, 588, 590, 592, 596,                                                            in vapor power plants, 325, 329, 340, 341
         597, 598, 601, 605, 606, 611, 627,       Quasiequilibrium (quasistatic) processes, 7,      Relative humidity, 581, 582, 584, 585, 586,
         649, 651, 652, 653, 654, 656, 658,             22, 42, 43, 70, 88
         660, 683, 707, 708, 709                                                                          592, 595­98, 600, 601, 604­607, 610­612
   reduced, 96, 97                                Radiation, thermal, 8, 16, 45, 46, 60, 62, 191,   Relative pressure, 242
   relative, 242                                        326, 591                                    Relative volume, 242
   saturation, 71­73                                                                                Reservoir, thermal, 16, 178, 179, 181, 182,
   sensors, 13                                    Radiation thermometer, 16
   stagnation (total), 430, 437                   Ram effect, 414, 419                                    183, 184, 185, 186, 187, 188, 189, 190,
   vacuum, 12                                     Ramjet, 418, 419                                        191, 192, 193, 196, 197, 198, 206, 207,
Pressure-enthalpy diagram, 466, 467               Rankine cycle, 327, 329, 330, 331, 333, 334,            208, 222
Pressure-temperature diagram (phase­                                                                Resistance temperature detector, 16
      diagram), 71, 72                                  335, 336, 337, 338, 339, 340, 341, 355,     Reversible Process, 180­184
Pressure-volume diagram, 73, 74                         356, 365, 366                                  internally reversible,184, 197, 198, 199,
Pressure-volume-temperature surface, 73, 74       Rankine temperature scale, 18, 194, 198, 218
Principle of increase of entropy, 228, 229,       Rayleigh line, 436                                         208, 209, 213, 214, 217, 218, 219,
      230, 285, 680                               Reacting systems, 620, 629, 630, 637, 639,                 220, 221, 225, 287, 330, 334, 354,
Problem-solving methodology, 330, 333                   643, 648, 649, 654, 667, 669, 670, 679,              376, 381, 425, 455
Process:                                                684, 692, 704
   adiabatic, 14, 45, 196, 197, 198, 218,            energy balances for, 631­635                   Saturated air, 580
         224, 226                                    entropy balances for, 649                      Saturated liquid, 71­73
   definition, 5                                     exergy analysis of, 667­670                    Saturated vapor,71­73
   internally reversible, 184, 197, 198, 199,     Reaction equilibrium, equation of, 684, 685,      Saturation pressure,71­73
         208, 209, 213, 214, 217, 218, 219,             686, 687, 694                               Saturation Temperature, 73, 74, 75, 77, 78,
         220, 221, 225, 287, 330, 334, 354,       Reciprocating compressor, 139, 466
         376, 381, 425, 455                       Rectifier, 470, 471                                     81, 83, 89, 210, 583, 585, 586, 588, 589,
   irreversible, 180, 182, 184, 224, 436,         Recuperator                                             590, 591, 593
         459, 681                                 Redlich-Kwong equation of state, 490­ 493         Second law efficiency, 303­306
   isentropic, 218, 240                              table of constants, 762, 812                      heat exchangers, 327
   polytropic, 243, 256                           Reduced property, 524­526                            turbines, compressors, pumps, 134
   quasiequilibrium (quasistatic),, 7, 22, 42,    Reference state, 84, 85, 106, 107, 210, 211,      Second law of thermodynamics:
         43, 70, 88                                     215, 216, 430, 547, 592, 629, 648, 655         Clausius statement, 177
   reversible, 180­184                            Refrigerant, 61, 76                                  general remarks, 177­180
   throttling, 148, 149, 238, 295, 296, 354,      Refrigerant 22, properties of, 22, 76, 85            Kelvin-Planck statement, 178, 179
         458, 459, 460, 461, 462, 464, 518        Refrigerant 134a, properties of, 76, 83, 85       Semiconductor, 16
Propane,properties of 76, 84, 85, 97, 465         Refrigerant, natural, 84, 85                      Sign convention:
Property:                                         Refrigerants, 84, 85, 210, 211, 465, 466, 468,       for cycles, 376
   definition, 5                                        479, 520                                       for heat, 45, 47
   extensive, 6, 31, 32, 43, 62, 129, 209, 228,   Refrigeration,                                       for work, 34, 35
         229, 230, 231, 257, 277, 278, 315,          absorption, 2                                  Simple compressible system, 69, 70
         536, 537, 538, 681                          Brayton cycle, 474, 478, 479                   Simple system, 70
   independent, 70, 151                              capacity, 458                                  SI units, 8, 9, 10, 22, 86, 90, 91, 159, 212,
   intensive, 6, 10, 14, 42, 43, 69, 75, 281,        Carnot cycle, 196, 197, 198, 199, 218, 335,          217, 592
         429, 539, 682, 710                                                                         Solar energy, 189
   reduced, 524­526                                        336, 425, 426, 456, 472                  Solid oxide fuel cell, 645, 646, 647
   relations from exact differentials, 35, 494,      Cascade cycles, 467­468                        Solutions:
         497, 498, 500, 548                          cryogenic, 646                                       equilibrium constant for, 694
                                                                                                          ideal, 546
830 Index

Sound, velocity of, 427­429                      Superheated vapor, 75, 77, 79, 81, 82, 83, 84,    Thermometric property, 14, 15, 16
Specific heat:                                         98, 99, 212, 213, 238, 240, 241, 340,       Thermostatic expansion valve, 485
                                                       342, 354, 457, 460, 462, 463, 584, 710      Thermosyphon, 372
   constant-pressure, 74, 101, 110, 112, 243,                                                      Third law of thermodynamics, 210, 648, 649,
         336, 381, 385, 386, 407, 415, 521       Supersonic, 429, 430, 432, 434, 435, 436,
                                                       437, 443, 444, 445                                651, 653
   constant-volume, 16, 17, 18, 112, 191, 243,                                                     Throat, 432, 434, 435, 443, 444
         375, 376, 381, 385, 386, 425, 680       Surface tension, 40, 42                           Throttling calorimeter, 148, 149
                                                 Surroundings, 3, 173, 175                         Throttling process, 148, 149, 238, 295, 296,
   of ideal gases, 91, 103, 104, 105, 106, 565,  Sustainable development, 28
         569                                     System:                                                 354, 458, 459, 460, 461, 462,
                                                                                                         464, 518
   of ideal gas mixtures, 564, 566                  boundary, 3                                    Thrust, 415, 418, 419
   of monatomic ideal gases, 119                    closed, 3                                      Ton of refrigeration, 458, 601
   relations, 113                                   definition, 3                                  Topping cycle, 356, 357, 419
   of solids and liquids, 92, 93                    isolated, 3, 228, 230, 273                     Transient analysis of control volumes, 153
   zero-pressure, 92, 105                           open (control volume), 3                       Transonic, 429
Specific heat ratio, 91, 104, 243, 244, 377,        simple compressible, 69, 70, 213, 274          Triple point, 17, 18, 19, 71, 72, 73, 75, 76,
                                                    simple, 3,70                                         84, 191, 192
      392, 394, 395, 410, 429, 441, 444, 516,    System integration, 134, 149                      Turbine,
      517, 548, 565                                                                                   effectiveness, 306
Specific humidity (humidity ratio), 581          T dS equations, 213, 214, 498                     isentropic efficiency, 345, 477
Specific volume, 11                              Temperature:                                      Turbofan engine, 418
   approximation using saturated liquid data,                                                      Turbojet engine, 2, 414, 415, 416
                                                    absolute, 46, 49, 191, 206, 207                Turboprop engine, 418
         92, 93                                     adiabatic flame, 641­645
   critical, 71, 72, 77                             dew point, 583­588                             Ulitmate analysis, 621­622
   molar, 12                                        dry-bulb, 590, 591                             Units:
   pseudoreduced, 97                                equality of, 14
   reduced, 97                                      equilibrium flame, 695­699                        English engineering, 9­11
Stagnation state, 426, 430, 436, 437,               gas scale of, 17, 18                              SI (Systčme Internationale d'Unités), 8­9
                                                    Kelvin scale of, 17, 18, 190, 191              Universal gas constant, 95
      442, 444                                      reduced, 96                                    Urban heat islands, 189
Standard state, 629, 630, 631, 648, 654             saturation, 73                                 U-tube manometer, 26
State:                                              sensors, 15
                                                    stagnation, 430                                Vacuum pressure, 12
   dead, 275                                        thermodynamic scale of, 190, 191               Valves, 3, 134, 373, 374
   definition, 5                                    triple point, 18, 19, 71, 73, 76, 192          Van der Waals equation of state, 489,
   equilibrium, 7                                   various scales of, 18
   reference, 210, 211, 215                         wet-bulb, 590, 591                                   491, 496
   stagnation, 426                               Temperature-entropy diagram, 211, 212                table of constants, 762, 812
   steady, 5, 125­162, 233, 254                     for water, 581                                 van't Hoff equation, 695, 699, 700,
   triple, 71, 73                                Temperature-specific volume diagram, 73, 74
State principle, 69, 70, 79, 114                 Theoretical air, for combustion,622, 623, 624,          706, 711
Statistical thermodynamics, 5, 230, 231, 630,                                                      Vapor, saturated, 75, 77
                                                       626, 627, 628, 629, 643, 644, 649, 650,     Vapor-compression heat pumps, 471­473
      648, 700                                         651, 665, 666, 668, 670                     Vapor-compression refrigeration, 148, 457,
Steady state, 5, 125­162, 233, 254               Thermal conductivity, 46, 466
Steam generator, 2, 150, 151, 300, 301, 302,     Thermal efficiency, 60                                  458, 459, 461, 462, 463, 467, 472,
                                                    of a Carnot cycle, 186                               479, 480
      309, 340, 341, 346, 348, 349, 351, 353,    Thermal equilibrium, 14, 16                       Vaporization, 71, 75, 76, 79, 83, 341, 457,
      354, 356, 358, 361, 366                    Thermal pollution, 326                                  504, 506, 631
Steam point, 18, 19                              Thermal radiation, energy transfer by,45, 46      Vapor power cycle, 329, 336, 338, 340, 341,
Stagnation Temperature, 437, 440, 443            Thermal reservoir, 178, 182, 184, 185, 186, 188,        346, 347, 348, 349, 350, 351, 352, 353,
Steam-injected gas turbine, 452                        189, 190, 191, 192, 193, 196, 199, 207            355, 356, 358, 365, 394, 419, 421,
Steam jet refrigeration, 482                     Thermistor, 16                                          422, 423
Steam rate, 271                                  Thermodynamics:                                   Velocity of sound, 426, 427, 429, 433, 444,
Steam tables, 76, 349, 487, 503, 507, 508,          first law of, 29­ 48                                 514, 515, 516, 517, 522
      522, 582, 589, 631, 665                       general comments, 1                            Virial equation of state, 488
Stefan-Boltzmann law, 46, 47                        second law of, 18, 43, 58, 61, 84              Volume:
Stirling cycles, 196, 424, 425, 426,                statistical, 5, 230, 231                          change upon mixing, 538
      444, 445                                      third law of, 210, 648, 649, 651, 653             critical specific, 72
Stoichiometric coefficient, 621, 685, 686,          zeroth law of, 14                                 partial, 564
      688, 702                                   Thermodynamic tables, Appendix                       pseudoreduced specific, 97
Stress, 11, 35, 40, 42, 114, 138                 Thermoeconomics, 309, 310, 311, 313                  reduced specific, 97
Stroke (piston), 373­376                         Thermometer, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 148, 191,           relative, 242
Subcooled liquids, see Liquids                         590, 591                                       specific, 10
Sublimation, 71, 75, 76, 504, 505, 506                                                             Volume expansivity, 513, 514, 515, 517, 548
Subsonic, 429, 430, 432, 433, 434, 435, 436,
      437, 439, 443, 444, 445
Superheat, 89, 210, 211, 340, 341, 343, 345,
      347, 356, 365, 420
Volumetric analysis, 559, 564                   Wind turbines, 293                                                                Index 831
Volumetric flow rate, 124, 125, 126, 141, 142,  Work:
                                                                                            Working fluid, 325, 326, 328, 329, 330, 331,
      392, 393, 475, 476, 478, 577, 595, 596,      electrical, 56                                 332, 333, 334, 335, 336, 337, 338, 339,
      597, 600, 604, 605, 607, 608                 energy transfer by, 35, 41, 42, 130            341, 342, 343, 344, 346, 348, 349, 351,
Vortex tube, 237                                   exergy transfer accompanying, 284, 286,        352, 353, 354, 356, 358, 359, 365, 373,
                                                                                                  375, 381, 388, 390, 393, 395, 396, 398,
Waste heat, 150, 300, 308, 469, 473, 668                 289                                      399, 401, 402, 405, 406, 410, 411, 413,
Water:                                             expansion or compression, 36­40                415, 416, 421, 425, 426, 444, 459, 462,
                                                   extension of a solid bar, 33                   465, 471, 473, 476, 477
   steam tables, 76, 77, 582, 589, 631             flow work, 130, 131
Water-gas reaction, 712                            in mechanics, definition of, 34          Young's modulus, 64
Wet-bulb temperature, 590, 591, 593, 602,          polarization and magnetization, 41­ 43
                                                   in quasiequilibrium processes, 42, 70    Z-chart, see generalized compressibility chart
      603, 604, 606, 611                           sign convention for, 34                  Zeldovich mechanism, 716
Wet compression, 456                               thermodynamic definition of, 34          Zero-pressure specific heat, 105
Wind chill index, 591                              transmitted by a shaft, 41, 42           Zeroth law of thermodynamics, 14
Wind tunnels, 426
Mole - Wikipedia  http://it.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mole

        Mole

        Da Wikipedia, l'enciclopedia libera.

        La mole (ex grammomole, simbolo mol; il simbolo della grandezzaquantitŕ č n) č una delle sette unitŕ di
        misura fondamentali del Sistema Internazionale. Misura la quantitŕ delle sostanze.

               La mole č definita come la quantitŕ di sostanza di un sistema che contiene un numero di unitŕ
                           intereagenti[1] pari al numero degli atomi presenti in 12 grammi di carbonio-12.

        Tale numero č noto come numero di Avogadro, ed č pari a 6,02214179(30) · 1023 .[2] Una mole č quindi
        associata ad un numero enorme di entitŕ o particelle (piů di seicentomila miliardi di miliardi).

        Nel caso di un composto chimico, si puň definire la mole come il valore della quantitŕ (ad esempio espressa in
        grammi) di particelle uguale al peso molecolare di ogni singola molecola. Tale quantitŕ in realtŕ varia a
        seconda della miscela isotopica che prendiamo in considerazione, ma la sua variazione puň in genere
        assumersi trascurabile.

        Il concetto di mole fu introdotto da Wilhelm Ostwald nel 1896,[2]

                                Indice

         1 Rappresentazioni del numero di Avogadro
         2 Definizioni aggiornate di mole

               2.1 Esempi
         3 Alcune applicazioni del concetto di mole

               3.1 Esempio - calcoli stechiometrici
         4 Note
         5 Bibliografia
         6 Voci correlate

        Rappresentazioni del numero di Avogadro

                Per approfondire, vedi la voce numero di Avogadro.

        Per avere un'idea di quanto sia grande il numero di Avogadro, possiamo servirci delle seguenti visualizzazioni:

               Se si prendesse un numero di palline da ping pong pari a quello di Avogadro (quindi una "mole" di
               palline da ping pong) e le si disponesse in modo omogeneo su tutta la superficie terrestre, si
               raggiungerebbe un'altezza di cinquanta chilometri, ovvero piů di sei volte l'altezza del monte Everest.
               Ancora: se si disponessero tali palline in un'unica fila essa avrebbe una lunghezza pari a circa
               20 128 000 000 volte la larghezza di tutto il Sistema solare.
               Il numero di tazzine d'acqua contenute nell'Oceano atlantico č dell'ordine di grandezza del numero di
               Avogadro, cosě come il numero di molecole d'acqua in una tazzina.
               Se la stessa quantitŕ di centesimi di euro fosse distribuita uniformemente tra la popolazione mondiale,
               ogni abitante della Terra avrebbe mille miliardi di euro.

1 di 5            27/09/2010 8.56
Mole - Wikipedia                                                                   http://it.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mole

Definizioni aggiornate di mole

La grammomole e la grammomolecola sono state eliminate nel 1963 dal XIII CGPM e sostituite dalla "mole
di sostanza". Dal 1972 la mole fa parte dell'SI e in Italia l'SI č diventato, per legge, l'unico sistema ufficiale di
unitŕ di misura. Dal 2002 l'SI č in vigore in tutto il mondo (ultimi arrivati: gli USA, che mantengono in vigore
il vecchio sistema per gli usi interni).

Dalla definizione segue che una quantitŕ di sostanza č pari a una mole quando contiene un numero di
Avogadro di particelle. Una mole della sostanza B contiene 6,022 1023 particelle di B. Il rapporto fra il
numero delle particelle considerate e la quantitŕ di B (in moli) si chiama costante di Avogadro e vale NA =
6,022 1023 molB-1 cioč il numero di Avogadro moltiplicato per il fattore di conversione (numero/molB)

Normalmente la sostanza B č una sostanza pura o una miscela ben definita (l'aria, per esempio, contiene 4
molecole di azoto e 1 molecola di ossigeno, in prima approssimazione). La quantitŕ della sostanza B diventa la
quantitŕ di B quando la sostanza viene esplicitata; p.es. "la quantitŕ dell'aria" o "la quantitŕ dell'ossigeno)

La quantitŕ di B č il rapporto fra il numero delle particelle considerate e la costante di Avogadro: nB = N°B /
NA

n č espresso in moli, NA in mol-1 e N° č un numero adimensionale

La massa molare di una sostanza B (MB) č data dal rapporto fra la massa e la sostanza di un corpo.

Ad esempio,la massa atomica del sodio č pari a 22,99 u; una mole di sodio (quindi in questo caso un numero
di Avogadro di atomi di sodio) corrisponde a 22,99 grammi di sostanza. La massa molare del sodio č 22,99
g/molNa.

Analogamente, nel caso dell'acqua (H2O), la massa molecolare č pari a 18,016 u; una mole di questa sostanza
č pari a 18,016 grammi. La massa molare dell'acqua 18,016 g/molH2O.

Nel caso del metano (CH4), la cui massa molecolare č 16,04, mezza mole (quindi mezzo numero di Avogadro
di molecole) corrisponde a 8 grammi. Talvolta si preferisce esplicitare i due casi usando le denominazioni
ormai obsolete di grammoatomo (mole di un elemento) e grammomolecola (mole di un composto).[3]

Nei paesi anglosassoni vengono inoltre utilizzate le definizioni di libbramolecola e libbramole, che sono
simili alle definizioni di grammomolecola e grammomole, tranne per il fatto che ci si riferisce alla libbra per la
misura della massa.

Non ci si puň riferire alla mole di atomi o molecole come massa molare perché la massa molare in

grammi/mole č una grandezza diversa. Indicando con n le moli e con M la massa molare (mole di entitŕ),

abbiamo:

       Esempi                                                                      27/09/2010 8.56

         Fonte: "Green Book" della IUPAC, IUPAP e ISO, 1993
                Convertire in grammi 1,8 mol di ossigeno atomico (O):
                Massa atomica relativa dell'ossigeno = 16,00
                m = M(Massa molare) × n(moli) = 16,00 g mol-1 × 1,8 mol = 29,00 g

2 di 5
Mole - Wikipedia  http://it.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mole

               Convertire in grammi 2,6 mol di ossigeno molecolare (O2):

               Massa molecolare relativa dell'ossigeno = 32,00
               m = M × n = 32,00 g mol-1 × 2,6 mol = 83 g

               Calcolare le moli per generare 24 g di O:

               Massa atomica dell'ossigeno (O) = 16,00 u
               n=m/m(atomica)=24 g/16,00 u=1,5 mol

               Convertire in grammi 2,6 mol di cloruro di sodio (NaCl):

               Massa atomica del sodio (Na) = 22,99
               Massa atomica del cloro (Cl) = 35,45
               Massa molecolare del cloruro di sodio (NaCl) = 22,99 + 35,45 = 58,44
               m = 58,44 g mol-1 × 2,6 mol = 15 · 101 g

               Convertire in moli 11 g di ammoniaca (NH3):

        Massa molecolare di NH3 = 3 × 1,008 + 14,01 = 17,03
        n = m/M = 11 g / 17,03 g mol-1 = 0,65 mol

               Convertire in grammi 67,2 l di idrogeno allo stato gassoso (H2) a STP:

               n = V/Vmolare = 67,2 L / 22,414 L/mol = 3,00 mol
               Massa molare dell'idrogeno molecolare = 1,008 g/mol x 2 = 2,016 g/mol
               m = 2,016 g/mol × 3,00 mol = 6,05 g

        Alcune applicazioni del concetto di mole

        Il concetto di mole č utilizzato spesso in chimica, in quanto permette di paragonare particelle di massa
        differente. Inoltre, riferendoci alle moli anziché al numero di entitŕ, ci divincoliamo dall'uso di numeri molto
        grandi.

        La mole č utilizzata anche nelle definizioni di altre unitŕ di misura; ad esempio la carica di una mole di
        elettroni č chiamata faraday[4], pari a 96 485 coulomb, mentre una mole di fotoni č detta einstein.

        Il concetto di mole č utilizzato anche nelle equazioni di stato dei gas ideali; si ha che una mole di molecole di
        un qualunque gas ideale, in condizioni normali (temperatura di 0 °C e pressione 101 325 Pa = 1 atm) occupa
        un volume di 22,414 L per la legge di Avogadro. Cosě č possibile calcolare il numero di molecole presenti in
        un dato volume di gas, e quindi la sua massa.

        Esempio - calcoli stechiometrici

        Nel seguente esempio, le moli sono usate per calcolare la massa di CO2 emessa, quando č bruciato 1 g di
        etano. La formula coinvolta č:

                 3,5 O2 + C2H6  2 CO2 + 3 H2O

        Qui, 3,5 moli di ossigeno reagiscono con 1 mole di etano, per produrre 2 moli di CO2 e 3 moli di H2O. Si noti
        che la quantitŕ di molecole non necessita di essere bilanciata su ambo i lati dell'equazione: da 4,5 moli di gas
        si passa a 5 mol di gas. Questo perché la quantitŕ delle molecole di gas non conta la massa o il numero di
        atomi coinvolti, ma semplicemente il numero di particelle individuali. Nel nostro calcolo č prima di tutto
        necessario calcolare la quantitŕ dell'etano che č stato bruciato. La massa di una mole di sostanza č definita
        come pari alla sua massa atomica o molecolare, moltiplicata per il numero di Avogadro. La massa atomica

3 di 5            27/09/2010 8.56
Mole - Wikipedia                                                    http://it.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mole

        dell'idrogeno č pari a 1 u, mentre la massa molare di H č pari a 1 g/molH; la massa atomica del carbonio č pari
        a 12 u, la sua massa molare a 12 g/molC; quindi la massa molare del C2H6 č: 2×12 + 6×1 = 30 g/molC2H6. Una
        mole di etano pesa 30 g. La massa dell'etano bruciato era di 1 g, o 1/30 di mole. La massa molare della CO2
        (con massa atomica del carbonio 12 u e dell'ossigeno 16 u) č: 2×16 u + 12 u = 44 u, quindi una mole di
        diossido di carbonio ha una massa di 44 g. Dalla formula sappiamo che:

               1 mole di etano produce 2 moli di diossido di carbonio.

        Conosciamo anche la massa dell'etano e del diossido di carbonio, quindi:

               30 g di etano producono 2×44 g di diossido di carbonio.

        Č necessario moltiplicare per due la massa del diossido di carbonio perché ne vengono prodotte due moli .
        Comunque, sappiamo anche che solo 1/30 dell'etano č stato bruciato. E di nuovo:

               1/30 di mole di etano produce 2×1/30 di mole di biossido di carbonio.

        E infine

               30 × 1/30 g di etano producono 44 × 2/30 g di biossido di carbonio = 2,93 g

        Note

            1. ^ Le entitŕ chimiche e fisiche a cui si fa riferimento nella definizione di mole possono essere atomi, molecole,
                ioni, radicali, elettroni, fotoni, e altre particelle o raggruppamenti specifici di queste entitŕ. Si veda anche lista
                delle particelle.

            2. ^ a b Silvestroni, op. cit., p. 157
            3. ^ Silvestroni, op. cit., p. 156
            4. ^ da non confondere con l'unitŕ della capacitŕ elettrica, il farad

        Bibliografia

               Paolo Silvestroni, Fondamenti di chimica, 10a ed. CEA, 1996. ISBN 88-408-0998-8
               Silvio Gori, Chimica fisica, 1a ed. Padova, PICCIN, 1999.
               IUPAC,IUPAP,ISO, "Green Book", 1a ed. Londra, Blackwell, 1993.

        Voci correlate

               Equivalente
               Frazione molare
               Molaritŕ

                               Unitŕ di misura

        Sistemi di misurazione · Conversione delle unitŕ di misura · Sistema consuetudinario statunitense · Sistema imperiale britannico ·
                                                                    Antiche unitŕ di misura italiane

                               Sistema Internazionale                espandi

                  Sistema CGS   espandi                Sistema MTS   espandi

                               Unitŕ atomiche                        espandi

4 di 5                                                              27/09/2010 8.56
Mole - Wikipedia                             http://it.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mole

                  Unitŕ di misura di Planck   espandi

        Categorie: Concetti fondamentali di chimica | Stechiometria | Unitŕ di misura SI di base | Unitŕ di quantitŕ di
        sostanza | [altre]

               Ultima modifica per la pagina: 11:37, 10 set 2010.
               Il testo č disponibile secondo la licenza Creative Commons Attribuzione-Condividi allo stesso modo;
               possono applicarsi condizioni ulteriori. Vedi le condizioni d'uso per i dettagli. Wikipedia® č un marchio
               registrato della Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

               Politica sulla privacy
               Informazioni su Wikipedia
               Avvertenze

5 di 5                                       27/09/2010 8.56
Mole (unit) - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia  http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mole_(unit)

        Mole (unit)

        From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

        The mole is a unit of measurement for the amount of substance or chemical amount. It is one of the base
        units in the International System of Units, and has the unit symbol mol.[1]

        The name mole is an 1897 translation[2][3] of the German unit Mol, coined by the chemist Wilhelm Ostwald
        in 1893,[4] although the related concept of equivalent mass had been in use at least a century earlier. The
        name is assumed[5] to be derived from the German word Molekül (molecule).

        The mole is defined as the amount of substance that contains as many elementary entities (e.g., atoms,
        molecules, ions, electrons) as there are atoms in 0.012 kg of the isotope carbon-12 (12C).[1] Thus, by
        definition, one mole of pure 12C has a mass of exactly 12 g. The amount of substance n (in mol) and the
        number of atoms or molecules contained in it, N, are proportional, and the proportionality constant N/n is
        known as Avogadro constant. By definition it has the dimension of the inverse of amount of substance (unit
        mol-1) and its experimentally determined value is approximately 6.022 142 × 1023 mol-1.[6]

        By this definition, a mole of any pure substance has a mass in grams exactly equal to that substance's
        molecular or atomic mass; e.g., 1 mol of calcium-40 is approximately equal to 40 g, because the Ca-40
        isotope has a mass of 39.9625906 amu on the C-12 scale. In other words, the numerical value of a
        substance's molecular or atomic mass in atomic mass units is the same as that of its molar mass--the mass of
        one mole of that substance--in grams.

        The most common method of determining the amount, expressed in moles, of pure substance the value of
        whose molar mass is known, is to measure its mass in grams and then to divide by its molar mass (expressed
        in g/mol).[7] Molar masses may be easily calculated from tabulated values of atomic weights and the molar
        mass constant (which has a convenient defined value of 1 g/mol). Other methods include the use of the
        molar volume or the measurement of electric charge.[7]

        The current definition of the mole was approved during the 1960s.[1][8] Earlier definitions had been based
        on the atomic mass of hydrogen (about one gram of hydrogen-1 gas, excluding its heavy isotopes), the
        atomic weight of oxygen, and the relative atomic mass of oxygen-16; the four different definitions were
        equivalent to within 1%.

        The names gram-atom (abbreviated gat.) and gram-molecule have also been used in the same sense as
        "mole".[1] However, modern conventions define the gram-atom and the mole differently. While the
        elementary entity defining a mole will vary depending on the substance, the elementary entity for the
        gram-atom is always the atom. For example, 1 mole of He is equivalent to 1 gram-atom of He, but 1 mole of
        MgB2 is equivalent to 3 gram-atoms of MgB2.[9][10]

        Contents

               1 History
               2 The mole as a unit
               3 Other units called "mole"
               4 Proposed future definition

                       4.1 Kilogram

1 di 4                                          27/09/2010 8.57
Mole (unit) - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia                                   http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mole_(unit)

        5 Related units
        6 The unit's holiday
        7 See also
        8 References
        9 External links

        History

        The first table of atomic weights was published by John Dalton (1766­1844) in 1805, based on a system in
        which the atomic weight of hydrogen was defined as 1. These atomic weights were based on the
        stoichiometric proportions of chemical reactions and compounds, a fact which greatly aided their
        acceptance: it was not necessary for a chemist to subscribe to atomic theory (an unproven hypothesis at the
        time) to make practical use of the tables. This would lead to some confusion between atomic weights
        (promoted by proponents of atomic theory) and equivalent weights (promoted by its opponents and which
        sometimes differed from atomic weights by an integer factor), which would last throughout much of the
        nineteenth century.

        Jöns Jacob Berzelius (1779­1848) was instrumental in the determination of atomic weights to ever
        increasing accuracy. He was also the first chemist to use oxygen as the standard to which other weights were
        referred. Oxygen is a useful standard, as, unlike hydrogen, it forms compounds with most other elements,
        especially metals. However he chose to fix the atomic weight of oxygen as 100, an innovation which did not
        catch on.

        Charles Frédéric Gerhardt (1816­56), Henri Victor Regnault (1810­78) and Stanislao Cannizzaro
        (1826­1910) expanded on Berzelius' work, resolving many of the problems of unknown stoichiometry of
        compounds, and the use of atomic weights attracted a large consensus by the time of the Karlsruhe Congress
        (1860). The convention had reverted to defining the atomic weight of hydrogen as 1, although at the level of
        precision of measurements at that time--relative uncertainties of around 1%--this was numerically
        equivalent to the later standard of oxygen = 16. However the chemical convenience of having oxygen as the
        primary atomic weight standard became ever more evident with advances in analytical chemistry and the
        need for ever more accurate atomic weight determinations.

        Scale basis                             Scale basis  Relative deviation

                                                relative to 12C = 12 from the 12C = 12 scale

        Atomic weight of hydrogen = 1 1.00794(7)             -0.788%

        Atomic weight of oxygen = 16 15.9994(3)              +37.5 ppm

        Relative atomic mass of 16O = 16 15.9949146221(15)   +318 ppm

        The mole as a unit

        Since its adoption into the International System of Units, there have been a number of criticisms of the
        concept of the mole being a unit like the metre or the second.[8] These criticisms may be briefly summarized
        as:

               amount of substance is not a true physical quantity (or dimension), and is redundant to mass, so should
               not have its own base unit;
               the mole is simply a shorthand way of referring to a large number.

        In chemistry, it has been known since Proust's law of definite proportions (1794) that knowledge of the mass

2 di 4                                                                                        27/09/2010 8.57
Mole (unit) - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia                       http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mole_(unit)

        of each of the components in a chemical system is not sufficient to define the system. Amount of substance
        can be described as mass divided by Proust's "definite proportions", and contains information which is
        missing from the measurement of mass alone. As demonstrated by Dalton's law of partial pressures (1803), a
        measurement of mass is not even necessary to measure the amount of substance (although in practice it is
        usual). There are many physical relationships between amount of substance and other physical quantities,
        most notably the ideal gas law (where the relationship was first demonstrated in 1857). The term "mole" was
        first used in a textbook describing these colligative properties.

        Other units called "mole"

        Chemical engineers use the concept extensively, but the unit is rather small for industrial use. For

        convenience in avoiding conversions, some American engineers adopted the pound-mole (noted lb-mol or
        lbmol), which is defined as the number of entities in 12 lb of 12C. One lb-mol is equal to 453.592 37 mol.[11]

        In the metric system, chemical engineers once used the kilogram-mole (noted kg-mol), which is defined as
        the number of entities in 12 kg of 12C, and often referred to the mole as the gram-mole (noted g-mol), when
        dealing with laboratory data.[11] However modern chemical engineering practice is to use the kilomole
        (kmol), which is identical to the kilogram-mole, but whose name and symbol adopt the SI convention for
        standard multiples of metric units.

        Proposed future definition

        Kilogram

        As with other SI base units, there have been proposals to redefine the kilogram in such a way as to define
        some currently measured physical constants to fixed values. One proposed definition of the kilogram is:[12]

               The kilogram is the mass of exactly (6.022 1415 × 1023/0.012) unbound carbon-12 atoms at rest and in
               their ground state.

        This would have the effect of defining the Avogadro constant to be precisely 6.022 1415 × 1023 elementary
        entities per mole.

        Related units

        The SI units for molar concentration are mol/m3. However, most chemical literature traditionally uses
        mol/dm3, or mol dm-3, which is the same as mol/L. These traditional units are often denoted by a capital
        letter M (pronounced "molar"), sometimes preceded by an SI prefix, for example millimoles per litre
        (mmol/L) or millimolar (mM), micromoles/litre (µmol/L) or micromolar (µM), or nanomoles/L (nmol/L) or
        nanomolar (nM).

        The unit's holiday

        October 23 is called Mole Day.[13] It is an informal holiday in honor of the unit among chemists in North
        America. The date is derived from Avogadro's number, which is approximately 6.02×1023.

        See also

        Einstein (unit)                         Stoichiometry
        Faraday (unit)                          Molar concentration

3 di 4                                                               27/09/2010 8.57
Mole (unit) - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia                http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mole_(unit)

        Molarity                                Molar volume

        References

         1. ^ a b c d International Bureau of Weights and Measures (2006), The International System of Units (SI)
             (http://www.bipm.org/utils/common/pdf/si_brochure_8_en.pdf) (8th ed.), pp. 114­15, ISBN 92-822-2213-6,
             http://www.bipm.org/utils/common/pdf/si_brochure_8_en.pdf

         2. ^ Helm, Georg (1897). The Principles of Mathematical Chemistry: The Energetics of Chemical Phenomena.
             transl. by Livingston, J.; Morgan, R.. New York: Wiley. p. 6.

         3. ^ Some sources place the date of first usage in English as 1902. Merriam­Webster proposes
             (http://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/mole%5B5%5D) an etymology from Molekulärgewicht (molecular
             weight).

         4. ^ Ostwald, Wilhelm (1893). Hand- und Hilfsbuch zur Ausführung Physiko-Chemischer Messungen. Leipzig.
             p. 119.

         5. ^ mole, n.8, Oxford English Dictionary, Draft Revision Dec. 2008
         6. ^ Mohr, Peter J.; Taylor, Barry N.; Newell, David B. (2008). "CODATA Recommended Values of the

             Fundamental Physical Constants: 2006" (http://physics.nist.gov/cuu/Constants/codata.pdf) . Rev. Mod. Phys.
             80: 633­730. doi:10.1103/RevModPhys.80.633 (http://dx.doi.org/10.1103%2FRevModPhys.80.633) .
             http://physics.nist.gov/cuu/Constants/codata.pdf. Direct link to value (http://physics.nist.gov/cgi-bin
             /cuu/Value?na) .
         7. ^ a b International Bureau of Weights and Measures. "Realising the mole (http://www.bipm.org/utils/en/pdf
             /SIApp2_mol_en.pdf) ." Retrieved 25 September 2008.
         8. ^ a b de Bičvre, P.; Peiser, H.S. (1992). "'Atomic Weight'--The Name, Its History, Definition, and Units"
             (http://www.iupac.org/publications/pac/1992/pdf/6410x1535.pdf) . Pure Appl. Chem. 64 (10): 1535­43.
             doi:10.1351/pac199264101535 (http://dx.doi.org/10.1351%2Fpac199264101535) . http://www.iupac.org
             /publications/pac/1992/pdf/6410x1535.pdf
         9. ^ Wang, Yuxing et al.; Bouquet, Fr d ric; Sheikin, Ilya; Toulemonde, Pierre; Revaz, Bernard; Eisterer, Michael;
             Weber, Harald W; Hinderer, Joerg et al. (2003). "Specific heat of MgB2 after irradiation". Journal of Physics:
             Condensed Matter 15: 883­893. doi:10.1088/0953-8984/15/6/315 (http://dx.doi.org
             /10.1088%2F0953-8984%2F15%2F6%2F315) .
        10. ^ Lortz, R. et al.; Wang, Y.; Abe, S.; Meingast, C.; Paderno, Yu.; Filippov, V.; Junod, A. (2005). "Specific heat,
             magnetic susceptibility, resistivity and thermal expansion of the superconductor ZrB12" (http://arxiv.org
             /abs/cond-mat/0502193) . Phys. Rev. B 72: 024547. doi:10.1103/PhysRevB.72.024547 (http://dx.doi.org
             /10.1103%2FPhysRevB.72.024547) . http://arxiv.org/abs/cond-mat/0502193.
        11. ^ a b Himmelblau, David (1996). Basic Principles and Calculations in Chemical Engineering (6 ed.).
             pp. 17­20. ISBN 0-13-305798-4.
        12. ^ Mills, Ian M.; Mohr, Peter J.; Quinn, Terry J.; Taylor, Barry N.; Williams, Edwin R. (2005). "Redefinition of
             the kilogram: a decision whose time has come" (http://www.iop.org/EJ/article/0026-1394/42/2/001
             /met5_2_001.pdf) . Metrologia 42: 71­80. doi:10.1088/0026-1394/42/2/001 (http://dx.doi.org
             /10.1088%2F0026-1394%2F42%2F2%2F001) . http://www.iop.org/EJ/article/0026-1394/42/2/001
             /met5_2_001.pdf. Abstract (http://www.iop.org/EJ/abstract/0026-1394/42/2/001/) .
        13. ^ History of National Mole Day Foundation, Inc (http://www.moleday.org/htdocs/history.html)

        External links

               ChemTeam: The Origin of the Word 'Mole' (http://web.archive.org/web/20071222072256/http:
               //dbhs.wvusd.k12.ca.us/webdocs/Mole/Origin-of-Mole.html) at the Wayback Machine (archived
               December 22, 2007).

        Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mole_(unit)"
        Categories: SI base units | Units of amount of substance

               This page was last modified on 24 September 2010 at 01:27.
               Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may
               apply. See Terms of Use for details.
               Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

4 di 4                                                        27/09/2010 8.57
Molar volume - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia  http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Molar_volume

        Molar volume

        From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
        The molar volume, symbol Vm,[1] is the volume occupied by one mole of a substance (chemical element or
        chemical compound) at a given temperature and pressure. It is equal to the molar mass (M) divided by the
        mass density (). It has the SI unit cubic metres per mole (m3/mol),[1] although it is more practical to use the
        units cubic decimetres per mole (dm3/mol) for gases and cubic centimetres per mole (cm3/mol) for liquids
        and solids.
        The molar volume of a substance can be found by measuring its mass and density then applying the relation

                                    .

        If the sample is a mixture containing N components, the molar volume is calculated using:

                                              .

        For ideal gases, the molar volume is given by the ideal gas equation: this is a good approximation for many
        common gases at standard temperature and pressure. For crystalline solids, the molar volume can be
        measured by X-ray crystallography.

        Contents

               1 Ideal gases
               2 Crystalline solids
               3 Molar volume of silicon
               4 References
               5 See also

        Ideal gases

        The ideal gas equation can be rearranged to give an expression for the molar volume of an ideal gas:

                                               .

        Hence, for a given temperature and pressure, the molar volume is the same for all ideal gases and is known
        to the same precision as the gas constant: R = 8.314 472(15) J mol­1 K­1, that is a relative standard
        uncertainty of 1.7×10­6, according to the 2006 CODATA recommended value.[2] The molar volume of an
        ideal gas at 100 kPa (1 bar) is

               22.710 980(38) dm3/mol at 0 °C
               24.789 598(42) dm3/mol at 25 °C

1 di 3                                           27/09/2010 8.58
Molar volume - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia  http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Molar_volume

        The molar volume of an ideal gas at 1 atmosphere of pressure is

               22.414 L/mol at 0 °C
               24.465 L/mol at 25 °C

        mols are measured n=m/M n=mols m=mass M=molar mass

        Crystalline solids

        The unit cell volume (Vcell) may be calculated from the unit cell parameters, whose determination is the first
        step in an X-ray crystallography experiment (the calculation is performed automatically by the structure
        determination software). This is related to the molar volume by

        where NA is the Avogadro constant and Z is the number of formula units in the unit cell. The result is
        normally reported as the "crystallographic density".

        Molar volume of silicon

        High quality single crystals of ultrapure silicon are routinely made for the electronics industry, and the
        measurement of the molar volume of silicon, both by X-ray crystallography and by the ratio of molar mass to
        mass density, has attracted much attention since the pioneering work at NIST by Deslattes et al. (1974).[3]
        The interest stems from the fact that accurate measurements of the unit cell volume, atomic weight and mass
        density of a pure crystalline solid provide a direct determination of the Avogadro constant.[4] At present
        (2006 CODATA recommended value), the precision of the value of the Avogadro constant is limited by the
        uncertainty in the value of the Planck constant (relative standard uncertainty of 5×10­8).[4][5]

        The 2006 CODATA recommended value for the molar volume of silicon is 12.058 8349(11)×10­6 m3/mol,
        with a relative standard uncertainty of 9.1×10­8.[5]

        References

            1. ^ a b International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (1993). Quantities, Units and Symbols in Physical
                Chemistry, 2nd edition, Oxford: Blackwell Science. ISBN 0-632-03583-8. p. 41. Electronic version.
                (http://www.iupac.org/publications/books/gbook/green_book_2ed.pdf)

            2. ^ "CODATA value: molar gas constant" (http://physics.nist.gov/cgi-bin/cuu/Value?r) . NIST.
                http://physics.nist.gov/cgi-bin/cuu/Value?r. Retrieved 2007-10-14.

            3. ^ Deslattes, R. D.; Henins, A.; Bowman, H. A.; Schoonover, R. M.; Carroll, C. L.; Barnes, I. L.; Machlan, L. A.;
                Moore, L. J.; Shields, W. R. (1974). "Determination of the Avogadro Constant". Phys. Rev. Lett. 33: 463­66.
                doi:10.1103/PhysRevLett.33.463 (http://dx.doi.org/10.1103%2FPhysRevLett.33.463) .

            4. ^ a b Mohr, Peter J.; Taylor, Barry N. (1999). "CODATA recommended values of the fundamental physical
                constants: 1998". J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data 28 (6): 1713­1852. doi:10.1103/RevModPhys.72.351
                (http://dx.doi.org/10.1103%2FRevModPhys.72.351) .

            5. ^ a b Mohr, Peter J.; Taylor, Barry N.; Newell, David B. (2008). "CODATA Recommended Values of the
                Fundamental Physical Constants: 2006" (http://physics.nist.gov/cuu/Constants/codata.pdf) . Rev. Mod. Phys.
                80: 633­730. doi:10.1103/RevModPhys.80.633 (http://dx.doi.org/10.1103%2FRevModPhys.80.633) .
                http://physics.nist.gov/cuu/Constants/codata.pdf.

        See also

2 di 3                                           27/09/2010 8.58
Molar volume - Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia  http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Molar_volume

        Interactive table of molar volumes at http://www.webelements.com/periodicity/molar_volume/

        Retrieved from "http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Molar_volume"
        Categories: Molar quantities | Physical quantities | Volume

               This page was last modified on 8 June 2010 at 01:58.
               Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may
               apply. See Terms of Use for details.
               Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.

3 di 3                                           27/09/2010 8.58
