                ENERGY
                FROM NATURE
                      10MAN




                   William C. Reynolds
                  Professor and Chairman
            Department of Mechanical Engineering
                    Stanford University




              McGraw-Hill Book Company
New York St. Louis San Francisco Dusseldorf Johannesburg
    Kuala Lumpur London Mexico Montreal New Delhi
Panama Paris Sao Paulo Singapore Sydney Tokyo Toronto
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Reynolds, \VHliam Craig, date
  Energy: From Nature to ?vfan
  Bibliography: p.
  !. Power (Mechanics) l. Title
TJ153.R43 621        73-22419
ISBN 0-07-052043-7




ENERGY: From Nature to Man
Copyright© 1974 by McGraw-Hill, Inc. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America. No part of this publication
may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system 1 or transmitted) in any
form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or
otherwise, without the prior written permission of the publisher.
234567890KPKP7987654
T~is book was set in Baskervi!le.
The editors were B. J. Clark and Matthew Cahill;
the designer was Pencils Portfolio. Inc,;
the production supervisor was Leroy A. Young.
The drawlngs were done by John Cordes.
J & R Technical Services, Inc,
Kingsport Press, Inc,, was printer and binder.
CONTENTS




             PREFACE     vli

CHAPTER 1    THE BIG PICTURE     1
CHAPTER 'l   IT AU. STARTS WITH MECHANICS      29
CHAPTER 3    HEAT AND OTHER THINGS      M
CHAPTER 4    FLOW SYSTEM ENERGETICS      97
CHAPTER 5    MAKING CHEMICAL BONDS WORK         151
CHAPTER 8    HOW ELECTRONS WORK       180
CHAPTER 7    ATOMS WORK HARDER       218
CHAPTER 8    IT HAPPENS ON l Y ON EARTH    251
APPENDIX     UNIT SYSTEMS ANO CONVERSION FACTORS      267
             READINGS    271

             INDEX     273




                                                        v
PREFACE




This book was developed for use in a course about energy and energy
technology aimed primarily at nonengineering students. The approach is
quantitative but at a modest mathematical level; some high school science
and mathematics seems adequate preparation.
    At Stanford the course is part of an integrated prograru called "Values,
Technology, and Society" (VTS). The VTS program has several objec-
tives, including the goal of bringing technical literacy to a \vide segment
of the general undergraduate population. This book is used in conjunction
with other readings on energy technoiogy, energy resourc,es 1 and energy
policy and involves contributions from faculty members of several of the
engineering departments.
    In these pages we have attempted to provide a basic background in the
concepts that underlie engineering science and to present these in a
manner that students \.vithout much technical training can easily relate to
personal experience. The objective is not to make students skilled at
engineering analysis but to give them son1e feeling and appreciation for
what such analy$is involves~ so that they may better understand what
they read. A style of problems has been developed which seems to be
quite successful with such students, lrVe ask them to do s01ne simple
quantitative analysis, related to some sort of energy problem, and then to
reflect upon the significance of their analysis to their society, Sometin1es
we Mk them to rake the position ofstaff analysts for governmental agencies,
other times to think as a responsible citizen about to cast a vote or engage
in public debate on some critical issue. The objectives are to help them
realize the value of good quantitative information in dealing with these
situations and to help them develop their own system of values.
   We have found that, after developing a modest technical background,
these students can read and digest xnaterial presented in such senl.i~

                                                                         vii
viii   PREFACE



technical magazines as Scientific American or such trade magazines as
}Jechanical Engin1ering, Power, and Nuclear .l'iews. Each student is asked to
select an energy technology of his own choice and to prepare a survey
article on that subject in a style appropriate for communication to
persons with minimal technical backgrounds. Rather remarkable papers
on such diverse topics as "cooling towers," ~'breeder reactors/' "refuse-
energy systems/~ "geothermal power,H and "electric automobiles" have
emerged from this effort. Once acquainted with the Iiterature available
in a good engineering library, the students find their own inte-rests and dig
:remarkably deeply into tl1cir chosen subjects,
    Many of these students are very inexperienced in their ability to
conceptualize hardware. We have found that class time spent visiting our
mechanical engineering laboratory~ where a vast array of energy hardware
is on display and where Vle can show them ongoing research work in
energy sciences, is time very well spent. We also visit our central heating
and cooling plant) \Vhere students can hear the big boHers, see the steam
turbine that generates power for the computer center, feel the \\'arm water
falling out of the cooling towers, feel the moist air blown in their faces from
the top of the cooling towers, and see the complex system of controls. We
also visit a modern oil refinery and a nuclear power station, both of which
provide marvelous eye-opening experiences. We have stood in the 450-ft~
high cooling towers of a nuclear power plant under construction, been
inside the reactor vessel 1 and seen the steel and concrete and all the ma-
chinery required to pour energy into three tiny wires that trail out from the
 plant. These experiences are invaluable to students thirsty for an under~
standing of energy technology, and instructors using this material .are
strongly urged to arrange similar experiences for their students.
    If you are an instructor about to start a course like this, always guard
against being overly superficial; this ls a very troublesome point, but one
 that need not be a problem if you ask each student to deveiop son1e depth
in a particular narrow area. The term papers on specific technologies are
very helpful in this regard. Another useful approach is to bring in persons
with e.xpertise in fields other than your own. You may know the anecdotes
in your field of energy, but probably not in othersj your guests wiH field
questions better~ can supplement the text material, and can help bring
depth to the subject in areas where you 1 yourself, just attn't rufiiciently
experienced. But your organization and coordination of your i.-tsiton will
be essential to success in your course; be sure that your visi:uin know
 precisely where your students will be at the time theyrome. and if possible
gu over their talks w.ith them in detail ahead of time to di - re unn«es~
sary duplication and to help identify the points that need 10 btrmphasized
most strongly.
                                                            PREFACE   ix



   If you are a student about to study this book on your own, don't be
content with the information contained in these pages; it is just your
starter. Get to a library and read some of the magazines mentioned; talk
to engineers about their work. Do some of the personal experiments given
as problems. Only by such a concerted effort '\vill you develop a really
useful knowledge and perspective of the very interesting and complex
technology that brings energy from nature to man.
                                                     William C. Reynolds
     I
  THE BIG
 PICTURE


   1:1 which I.Ve get
some idea where thlngs
   and we are going




OBJECTIVES, SEMANTICS, PERQUISITES

This is a book about energy. Between 1960 and 1970 \Ve in the lJnited
States consumed as much electrical energy as in all time before 1960.
lt is quite likely that between 1970 and 1980 we again will consume more
electrical energy than in all time before 1970. \Ve cannot do this ¥.-ithout
impact on ourselves, ollr environment, and the world. Drastic changes
in the trends of energy utilization must someho\.v be made in the years
not far ahead. These matters are already becoming the subject of intense
public debate. To act responsibly, and intelligently, one must develop
an understanding of what energy is, ho'\\' we use it, and its impact upon
society; only then can one participate rationally in the decisions that
must be made,

                                                                          1
2   ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN



    Rational thinking about a subject such as energy has two important
 aspects. First, there are quantitativt matters for which numbers can be
developed by computation based on scientific principles. One might think
 that there is not much room for argument here; but there is, for to make
such a calculation one must always approximate the real world by a
simpJified model> and then use data (often incomplete) gathered from
 measurements (often inaccurate). A well-trained engineer or scientist
 will be able to identify the pitfalls of a particular quantitative argutnent,
and will produce a number of analyses covering the range of probable
realities. Then there is room for considerable debate as to which end of the
range is most realistic, and the debate can get very heated when one end
spells doom and the ether paradise. The second aspect of rational think-
ing is value judgment. ~fhere :is usually a great deal of rooJl;l for argument
here, even betwet".n persons pu.rportedly espousing the same values, but
especiaJly between persons who fail to articulate their values clearly. 1'he
cr1gir1eer can calculate the size of a bridge that could safely span the Grand
Canyon> without much room for debate on the quantitative issues. But
the question whether or not to put the bridge there in the first place is a
value judgmcnt that relates to why the bridge is there and to its i1npact
upon other aspects of the setting. In the situation where a new power
plant is proirosed for a particular lotation, an environmentalist might
claim that the ecology of the river will be upset. A biologist 1night be
able to provide some numbers relating to the ecological impact \probably
not very reliable because of poor or nonexistent data), and a heated
debate over the quantitative issues could ensue. '\larious value judg-
ments might be espoused: "That power plant wiU foul up our river."
"The plant is essential to the economic survival of our community."
Ultimately the de<:ision should be made by considering the quantitative
facts against a background of importa.nt values; the better understood
the quantitative statements, the clearer the decision.
    In this book we shall emphasize the quantitative aspects necessary for
rational thinking in decisions about energy. The basic science of energy
is simple) relates \'\<'t>ll to personal experience) and does not involve very
complicated mathen1atics. If you do not already know about the simple
scientific matters that we will discuss here, you rnay be amazed to find
how much ytm will be able ro do with some very simple tools for quan-
titative analysis. \Ve cxpecti for example, that before Jong you will be
able to make a fair estimate of the temperature rise of the river used by
that new power plant that is proposed for your communityJ or to assess
quantitatively the impact of a national emphasis on generation of electric
po'"ver from solar energy. You may find that your ability to analyze these
situations quantitatively is very satisfying~ in which cue you, wiU exper-
                                                         THE BIG P!CTUAE    3



 ie:nce some of the emotions of an engineer. You will probably find that
 your ability to communicate with your engineering friends will improve
 dramatically as: you dei.relop your ability to think and talk about matters
 of mUtual interest. Vety soon you will be able to read articles in such
journals as Scientific American, lvfechanical Engineering, Pcwer, Technology
 &vtew~ and the Sm:iety ef Automotive En.girwers jqurnal (are these in your
 library?). From these journals you will be able to extract quantitative
 information that you can understand and can use in your arguments for
 or against a particular issue, Please always bear in mind that our objective
 is to give you some appreciation for \Vhat is involved when an engineer
 docs a quantitative analysis, not to make you a skilled engineer! If you
 already have this quantitative bent, and have studied rnath, science, or
 engineering~ look for ne'-v \Vays to think about the scientific matters
 discussed here; you may find new understanding, and perhaps some
 simple ways to explain your life to your nontechnicaJ friends.
     '~ScienceH is the systematic structure of ideas that are used to describe
 nature. The task of creating things that take advantage of scientific
 principles to do certain jobs is called "engineering," Thus, the engineer
 must understand and use science, and in addition have some inc1inarion
 for the nuts-and-bolts aspect of making real things work properly)
 cheaply, safely, reliably 5 and responsibly. The technique of doing all this
is called "technology." TI1e technology of road building is relatively
s.implei and does not i~volve much science or mathematics. The tech~
 nology of satellite communications is very sophi.-tticated, and involves very
newly developed scientific ldeas (some discovered by engineers and some
by scientists) aud higb..powered mathematics. Some engineers are at~
 tracted by the simplicity and effectiveness with w!Uch they can apply
low technology, and others are attracted by the complexity of high
technology. The technology of energy spans the spectrum from the
relatively low (wind1nills on tbe farm) to high {magnetohydrodynamic
power generation) ; so there is room for all kinds. Our objectives are to
give you son1e background in energy science, some experience with
energy engineering, and some feeling for energy technology.
    To help augment your feeling for hardware and your understanding
of energy lechnology, \Ve suggest that you make arrangements to visit a
variety of places nearby, preferably as you arc studying something about
that particular technology. Be sure to visit a large central power station.
If you are on or near a university t visit their mechanical engineering
laboratory, where you will probably .find examples of engines, heat
exchangers! turbines, compressors, boilers, etc. Or_ perhaps you can find
a factory with a central heating and cooling plant, or a large air-condition-
ing systemi where you can see things like cooling to'\\'crs,. pumps, et<;;,
4   ENERGY; FROM NATURE TO MAN



 During each visit get a quantitative feel for the size of the facility, say in
terms of the amount of energy or power handled, try to learn the capital~
equipment cost, and then <:-alcuiate the cost per unit energy or power.
Ask 7-rourself what a larger unit would be Jike, what the impact of the
facility is upon its <:ommunity, and how such systems directly affect your
life. You can do a lot on your own to gain more appreciation of energy
technology; this book should be only the start.
    Throughout the book we will raise questions that do not have unique
answers, but for which a combination of quantitative analysis and value
judgments provides the best basis for rational decisions, Try out y.our tools
for quantitative analysis on these questions; try to identify the pitfalls
in your analyses, and estimate the possible ranges of the quantitative
resu)ts. _l\nd try to articulate the values that you feel are important to the
questions and your own particular position on these values. Arc your
values shared by your society? By other cultures? How do the quantik'\tive
facts of life alter or influence your values and those of society? How
could (or should) the values of your society be changed?
    In this book we will concentrate on the technical aspects of energy.
You must be the author of you:r values, but vle will try to help you under-
stand, clarifyi and extend them, We hope that this experience wiU help
you develop a style of critical thinking that will serve you in many other
aspects of your life.


IT All ADDS UP
   What is energy? A good portion of this book will be devoted to the job
of developing an understanding of energy. As with all scientific concepts,
one develops good understanding only over a long period of time, with
frequent exposures from many angles. Think back; when did you first
hear about energy? Perhaps in the early elementary grades, if not before,
As a yow1g child, you may have read breakfast-cereal boxes, where the
contribution of the cereal to your minimum daily demands for energy
was proudly announced. You may have been scolded for wasting energy
by )caving on lights unnecessarily; through such experiences you became
aware of the fact that energy costs money, You no doubt saw commercials
describing how a particular high-energy gasoline makes cars perform
better 1 and you perhaps visited a ]arge power station near a dam on a
summer's vacation. If you grew up on a farm) you soon teamed the
notion that machinery could do a lot more work than you yourself could
do by hand. If you studied biology, chemistry, or physics in school, you
were again exposed to the concept of energy. The totality of your exposure
to various aspects and k.indq of energy puts you in a very good position
really to understand the concept of energy. Imagine how frustrated you
would feel if you began a study of energy v.-:ithout this personal back-
ground! ()ur first job is to tidy up your understanding of the concept of
energy; you have made this easy for us simply by living to your present
age in a world in which energy plays such an important role.
   TI1ere are three important aspects of the concept of energy; probt\b!y
you already know all these, but you may not have heard them articulated.
They are

    1 All matter and all things have energy.
    2 'lhe energy of the whole is the sum of the energies of the parts.
    3 Energy is conserved.

The first recognizes that energy is a property of matter; the molecules in a
certain chunk of matter, the electromagnetic waves in a certain fidd of
radiation, or the cells in a certain living organism have energy. TI1e second
aspect tells us that the amo11nt of energy in a complex system is the sum
of the energies in its various parts. This may seem trivial, but matter has
other properties (for exatnple, temperature) which do not behave in this
manner. The third states that the energy of a system that does not interact
in any way with anything else is constant, in other words, that the universe
always contains the same amount of energy {though perhaps the form of
the energy might change).* Why are these three statements true? You
might think that they are experimental observations, but in fact they are
really scit.-ntific axioms. We can't really tell anybody what energy is with-
out invoking these three ideas; they are part of the basic concept of energy.
They are as fundamental as energy itself,
    Often we want to analyze systems that interact strongly with their sur-
roundings, and to do this we use energy bookkeeping. As any good book-
keeper knows; we first n1ust define the system that we are dealing with
and the energy ftmvs to and fron1 it very carefully. (If you don't distin-
guish carefully between deposits and withdrawals, and make then1 for the
proper bank account, you are likely to end up bouncing checks!) Engi-
neer:> usually express their choice by drawing dotted lines around the
part of the world that they wish to consider as Hthe system." Figure L l
shows a schematic of a large central power station in the process of burn-
ing a fossil fuel for- the purpose of producing electric po"'·er. Not all the
fuel energy can be c.onverted into electrical energy, and some rejected
energy leaves through the boiler stacks and some more through the

•We shall Ul!e the term "consen,ation" of energy only to reflect this idea, which should
not be confused with the popular idea that "energy resuurces" must be <:otIBCrVed for thti
benefit of larer generations.                                                            '
 8   ENERGY: FROM NATURE i'O MAN




  FIG. 1.1 SCKEMATIC OF A STEAM
. POWER PLANT.


 cooling-tower exhaust. One possible choice for the "system" (sometimes
 called "the control volume") that would be analyzcd in the study of the
 energetics of this power station is shc\vn by dotted lines in Fig. l. 1.
 Figure 1.2: ls a photograph of a real power station that uses ocean water
 for cooling rather than cooling tu"vers. We have dra\vn a dotted line on
 this picture to show the equivalent system boundary. The three ideas
 discussed a hove tell us the follov.>ing:

     1   There is some energy in this system stored in the mass within;
         there is also a flow of energy into the system with the fuel, air 1
         aod water and out of the system with the stack and cooling-tower
         exhausts. And of course there is an energy outflow associated with
         the electric current.
     2   Since energy is conserved, the energy that flows into the system
         during one hour must account for the energy that flov.·s out during
                                                        THE BIG PICTURE    7



        that period plus any increase in the energy stored within the
        system. This is the statcrncnt of correct energy bookkeeping.
   3    At any instant in time, the energy within the system is the sum of
        the energies of an the parts (when the plant is operating steadily,
        this energy would be the same at aH instants in time 1 and this can
        lead to important simplifications in the energy analysis).

'I"he second gives us the basis for writing down a simple equation describ~
ing the conservation of energy for this system, called the "energy balance,"
                                                                       (l.l)
liere E stands for energy; E 1n represents the amount of energy that enters
the system in the time period under consideration; Eoui the amount that
leaves the system in this period, and liEsr.ored the -change in the amount of
energy stored within the system. In the language of mathematics the
symbol .6 is used to denote "final minus initial" (which of course is the
"change"), and so
                                                                       (1.2)

To do our bookkeeping properly~ the three terms in Eq. ( 1. J) must of
course be evaluated for the same time interval and in consistent measuring
units. And we must include all significant inflows and outflows of energy
in the evaluation of E 1n and Eout· Thus, for Fig. 1.1 1 we might '\\Tite
   Em     =   Erucl + l!.'uir + Ewllt«                                (l.3a)
   Em1t   = Eel«. + EsUtk + EtoW'er                                   (l.3b)
thereby neglecting other energy flows that we decide are not significant
for this system (such as the energy input from the sun).
    What <'-Ould we do with all this? If we can develop nwnbers for each
of the tenrn symbolized abo"<'-e, we could first examine the system to see
if indeed we had an "energy balance. i• An imbalance wou1d not indicate
that the conservarion-of..energy notion ls invalid but \vould instead
indicate either that our numbers or aritltmetlc were in error or that we
had neglected some significant terms, If the plant is operating steadily,
the amount of energy stored within the control volume should be the
same at all times. This "steady-state" condition would allow us to set
   M.roua = 0                                                          (l.4)
in which case the total energy input must be precisely balanced by the
total energy output. Since the objective of the power plant is to convert
the energy in the fuel to electrical energy·, we oould quantify the ability
                                      ,,;,_.,                       ·";                                      ,,~
                                                                                                              -.,~




..                                              Air' ~:rierYJY                ~Slack en.,}t·9y
                                                \ r"iput                          01ltuu1




         Electrical
         output
                '\




                            J,.' Cooling ·Nater                  Cncling v10ter             .. ~uc! energy
                       .P      ener-gy out'put

     FIG. 1.2   THE MOSS LANDING POWER STATION, 2t33 Mw, FOSStL~FU€tEO, OCtAN COOLA.NL COURTESY OF THE
     PACIFIC GAS AND E:LECTRIC COMPANY,
                                                     ------ -             -------------




                                                                 THE B!G PlCTUR.E       9



of the powe:r plant to do this by defining an "'overall plant efficiency ,' 1
which normally is denoted by the greek symbol ~ ("eta"),
        E
   q ~ ~                                                              (L3)
          EtueJ
In a typical power plant perhaps 30f)/o of the fuel energy would be con-
verted to electrical energy (11      0.3). We could then look at Est~k and
Eiower to see where the rest of the energy is going. Ifwe are clever~ perhaps
we could figure out some way to make use of this ('waste energy.'~ Or
perhaps the values of the times would dictate that it is nbest" simply to
waste this energy.
   The notion of an energy balance on a well~defined system, as illustrated
above, is very important. It is the primar;· tool by \\'hich one derives
quantitative information needed for the design, analysis> and decision
making involved in ene-;rgy systems, It is not very difficult; it is simply a
matter of good bookkeeping (evaluating the various terms in the energy
balance can be more tricky). You will learn hov; to do some simple
energy problerns yourself, and this will help you understand the harder
ones.


GETTING USED TO NUMBERS

  Let's begin to acquaint ourselves \vith numerical values of energy.
There are several important measures of energy, or energy units, in
common use today. These include

     The calorie 1 which is roughly the amount of energy that must be
     added to 1 gram of water to increase its temperature by l "'C.*
   2 The Btu (British thermal unit), which is roughly the amount of
     energy that must be added to J pound of vvater to increase its
     temperature l "F. t
   3 The joule, which is precisely the amount of energy that is used by
     a one-watt light bulb in one second.

One Btu corresponds to 252 calories; equivalences of these and other
energy units arc given in the Appendix> Table A.3.
   You will want to develop some personal "'feel'' for the magnitudes of
energy. One "calibration" point is that your d."lily intake of food ene-rgy

• "C stands for "degrees Celsius." You may know of it a.11 "degrees centigrade," which is
an older way of naming the same te-mperaturc interval.
t "F stands fo.r "degrees Fahrenheit," as. you probably know. An interval of 1"'F coqe-
sponds to an interval of i"'C.
10     ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN



 is around 2 to 4 million (i.e., 2 to 4 x 10 6 ) calories,• depending upon
 yo-ur particular size, shape, and activity. In terms of Btu, this is of the
 order ofB,000 to 16,000 Btu.
     Check the specification plate on your water heater at home; it prob-
 ably says something around 10~000 Btu, which indicates the arnount of
 energy that the heater is able to put into the water in one hour. Then,
 you can calculate how many pounds of water your heater can warm up
 lOO"F in this period.
    A<\nother helpful reference is the "toaster" calibration. A typical
 toaster requires about 1,000 joules of dectrical energy per second of
 operation. It takes perhaps 20 seconds to make tasty toast, or about
 20,000 Joules. A joule- is about :!- calorie (see Table A.3), So the amount
of electrical energy required to cook two pieces of toast for your breakfast
is about 5,000 calories, or about 0.2'}'~ of your body's energy requirement
for the day.
    If you are not familiar with the various energy units, do simple cal-
culations like these as you study the subject, and relate the energy tequire-
ments or output of various devices to the "you" calibration and the
"'toaster" calibration; before long you will have a very good feel for the
magnitude of energy num hers,
    An important aspect of systems that use or produce energy is the rate at
whlcb this happens. A battery that could deliver 20 x 10 8 joules would
be ideal for an electric urban automobile; but the battery would be use-
less unless this energy could be delivered in a few hours (nobody wants
to take three days to go the the supermarket). The '"power" of the device
is the characteristic that describes the rate at which it supplies or uses
energy; the power is the energy divided by the time required for the
energy transfer, Denoting the power by P, the energy by E, and the tin1e
 interval by t, the power is:~

          E
     P=-                                                                              (1.6)
          t


* l,000 calories = l kcaloric (kilocalorie). Food values are usually stated in kcalories,
often denoted simply as Calories (note the capital C that is often left out inadvertently by
dietitians:!) .

t If one wants to get ftmy with the mathematics, the time interval should be taken as
very small, in which case the energy transfer is very small_. but the ratio of the two (the
power) has a finite value. Equation (1,6) applies for longer time interval$ whette\"er
the powcr as so defined is uniform over the time interval, and is also used to describe
the a»ttYJgt power over a long time interval,
                                                     THE BIG PlCTURE     11



    For example, your calorific intake of 3,000 kcal in l day corresponds to
 an average of P = 3,000 kcal/24 hr = 125 kcal/hr, whi<"h corresponds
 to a steady diet of one cookie per hour. If you eat a 2,000..kcal dinner in
 l ht, your power input is 2,000 kcal/br, 16 tirncs the power input of a
 cookie nibbler.
    The power used by a toaster is about l 1 000 joulesjsec. The unit com-
 bination joules/sec {joules per second; per means "divided by") is termed
 ·~watts" after a famous contributor to energy technology; l,000 watts
is termed a kilowatt ("kilo" = I,000), abbreviated by~~'l.~ kw. ~'
                                                                               ,
 your toaster po\ver is about l kw. Power units are often given'-ln kw,
which is \vhy the "toaster calibration» is so useful. Another unit of power
that is in co1nrnon use is the horsepou,.<:r, abbreviated hp or HP, after a
famous horse. This is roughly the amount of power that a horse can deliver;
it is also equivalent to about i kw. In other words, a horse working hard
could dt>Jiver enough power to cook your breakfast toast. (Are you more
or less powerful than a horse?)
    Since electrical power is usually measured in kwJ electrical ene-.rgy is
usually given Jn kwhr ("kilovi:att hours;;; power times time equals energy),
Check th<- electric meter outside your residence; read the amount of
energy (in kwhr) used to date, and then read it again later and compute
the average electrical power that was used over this time period. Most
appliances) lights, etc.) have power requirf'-,ments in kw or watts stampeA
on them; check these to sec if you can account for the energy that the
electric co1npany says you used. By the way, they probably charge you
about 2.5 cents per kwhr (check your eiectric bill). You might compute
the cost of making toast, or oficaving a light burning all night, to further
increase your personal feel for energy and pov.·er.
    The horsepower unit is used for motors, pumps, and other devices that
produce or use energy. Get a feel for horsepower; remember that a kilo-
watt is about 4 of a horsepovic;er, Your kitchen refrigerator probably has
about a 1-hp n1otor; your heart uses about 0.01 hp; your automobile
engine may be rated at 300 hp but probably seldom actually produces
more tban 100 hp, even under drag-strip conditions. Large jet engines
produce about 25,000 hp. The largest modern stean1 turbines in central
power stations produce about a million horsepower.
    Figure 1.3 gives some typical energy and power numbers for some
i.nteresting systems. Note that the range of interest is enormous, and hence
a logarithmic scale has been used in each case. You will recall that
multiplication is equivalent to adding logarithms; this means that a fixed
percentage change is represented by a fixed interval on the logarithmic
scale, :irrespective of where on the scale the change is taken. Logarithmic
      12 ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN



           1oiz      !=--- Eilrtr1·s    daily receipt of soiJr energy
             2ot
           10 \:::--u.S.energy u~ m 1970

           10'8F
           I0'
                 6
                     F
                    i)aily electrical energy use in \J.S.(1970)
           IO' + -- Daily output' of Hoover Dam
           101z
           10 10     1-lt'=-- Chemical e1wr9y in ii barrel of oil
           jQ8
                     1--
           106       f=-- Kinetic energy of autoGJt 60mph
           10 4      I-
                     i-
           10•       !--- Monie energy of 30 caliber bullet
            I i-
           10-2 ~              -·Acoustic energy ofo sweetr,othing
      FIG. 1.38 THE ENERGY OF THINGS.

           1crn~1   •
              . - - Averciga   . input
                             SC·iJr .  ,o eat+·h
                                      .+
           ]QI•

           10'~ ~~ ·-- Power to biosphere from e.irti1'5 core
           1012 --Aver;;9e use oy mankind (10/0)
                - - t'i~ctrical powenise in u.S.(1910)
           I0'0 f-
      fl
      70 1oe 1-
                     r=--· ~ar9e ste;im turoine
      3'     L...·-Trnin
      ~ 10" [::: ..- Aurorr,obile
      R    10" ::._... Horse
                       Twster
           10'
               --··· l'Jasblight
            1
':)
 I
           io-2            -      HiJmilri heart
           10"" - - Bird's song
      FIG. 1.3b THE POWER or THINGS.
                                                          THE BIG PICTURE     13



scales such as those used hcre are very helpful in studying phenomena
involving rapid growth, such as the national consumption of energy; if
they are new to you~ buy sorne "!og-logH paper and some "semilog"
paper at your local book.store, and play with these until you feel com-
fortable plotting or reading such graphs. It takes only courage, not
mathematical wizardry!
   At this point it is important that you \vork seriously with the ideas
described above to get a reasonable feeling for energy and power mag~
nitudes.. You may not be quite sure just what energy is, but we~ll clarify
this in the next chapter, The remainder of tbis chapter provides an over~
view of the patterns of energy and power utilization in our contemporary
society. A reasonable feeling for energy and power magnitudes will help
make this material meaningful to you. You may also want to read it
again after you have learned more about energy technology.

PATTERNS AND CHANGES
     The United States, \Vith 6% of the world 1s population, accounts for
 about 35{!/o of the world~s energy utilization, The United States per capila
 utilization of energy (all forms) was about 250 kwhr per d4JI in 1970,
That's 250 hours of toasting per person per day! This is about 5 times
greater than the \Vorld average~ and of the order of20 times greater than
 that of an emerging industrial nation, such as India. Indeed, there is a
strong <:orrelation between "standard of living" (by whose values?) and
 the per capita energy t.-onsumption of various nations (see Fig, 1.4). High
energy consumption appears to be a necessary (but not sufficient} in~
gredient for a high standard of living.
     The 250 toasting hours mentioned above is somewhat misleading, for
 less than l 0°;~ of the energy used was electrical. 'fhe electrical energy
consumption in the lJnited States in 1970 was about 1.5 x 1012 kwhr
 {one and cne-haif trillion hours of toasting!), which amounts to about 21 k,.;hr
per day per capita (slightly less than one continuous toaster for every
man} woman, child!).
     Electrical energy must be obtained from inore primitive energy sources.
Fossil fuels were the source of most of the dectrical energy used by the
world in 1970; le.<IB than 5~~ was produced in nuclear and hydroelectric
power stations. The world's prime users of energy were theref.ore also
prime consumers of oil, gas 1 and coal, and in most cases also major
importers of these fuels. You may be surprised to learn, however, that
Japan imported twice as much oil as did the United States in 1970~
although the United States bufued about three times as much oil as did
Japan. But this picture may change dramatically as a result of new national
energy policies.                                                           '
14    ENERGY; FROM NATURE TO MAN




   Fossil fuels also provide a major source of energy for space heating and
industrial-process heating. The energy equivalent of the fossil fuels burned
in the United States during 1970 for all purposes wa& about 61 x 10 15
Btu (which you can calculate is equivalent to 1.8 x 10 13 kwhr). The
breakdown was as follows:

     Petroleum      24 x tol 5 Btu
     Coal           13 x 1015 Btu
     Natural gas    24 x l0 15 Btu
       Total        61 x IO" Btu

The energy equivalent of United States fossil-fuel imports (net) in 1970
was about 6 x 10 1 5 Btu; in other words, the United States imported
only about lO<j/0 of the energy that it utilized, taking practicaJly all its
needs from hoi:ne sources. Th.is is a direct result of basic policy decisions
that were ntade by the Eisenhower administration. New policies might
drastically change this distribution.
   Figure l .5 shows the utilization of energy in the United States in l970.
~otc that about 18°/o of the energy was not really used at all but was just
<>"'·asted" in the process of produeing and transp-0ning electrical energy.
                                                       THE BlG PICTURE     16




      i-.iah1r<?I gas
     (94s and iiquifiea)
             3€ 2o/..

       Imports t 1/%
FIG. 1.5UNITED STATES ::NERGY
FLOWS IN 1970, EXPRESSED AS
PERCENTAGES OF THE GROSS
CONSUMPTICN OF 64Ji x: 101 J Btv.


As mentioned earlier, a typical power plant is able to cou,rert only about
one-third of the input fuel energy into electrical energy) and the remain-
ing two-thirds makes up most of the "wasted" energy. Auton1obiles
accounted for the major portion of the energy used for transportation,
and space heating accounted for more than half the energy used in homes.
I ndustrlal uses \\'ere quite varied; estimates suggest that the steel industry
was the largest single industrial user of energy, taking about 20% of the
energy used industrially.
   The fractions: of energy utilized by different sectors of the society have
changed somewhat over the years, but the striking ehangc has been in the
amount of energy used each year by the society. Figure l.6a shows the
total annual energy utilization in the United States since 1850, with
projections to the year 2000. Note that this is a linear scale. Figure l .6b
shows the same information on a semilogarithmic scale. In regions where
a line is straight on a semi.log plot the quantity in question is increasing
by a fixed fraction each year. We see that the utilization of energy in
the Linited States has been increasing by about 3.5<>;{, each year over the
past 25 years. In other words, it has taken only about 20 years for the
annual consumption of energy in the United States to double. We say·
16     ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN




                                                                      -)




                                                                      .. "


                                                                      2000
                                      Year
FIG. 1.6a ANNUAL ENE!'!GY
CONSUMPTJON !N Tl-!E
UNITED STATES (ALL FOAMS).


       :ioo,~~   -~-;"'~···-




 I..      l
       2001-~
 ~
--
 ~ 100;~
      '
l'1
0         ~.
 ,,-c 60'--
        I__
:;::      '
 "-    i!o:-
 E
  ""'c 30~-
       20c-
 ""'>
  £'
  '"c 10 '                                 U •11? :rk>pe~ fur
0"                                         indi~ated ~loobli119        :._;
:S                                         µen9ls                      -·:
                                       _J.____   .,t '"""" , ___ L.

        1850                   1900              1il5J                woo
FIG. l .6b ANNUAL ENERGY
CONSUMPTION JN THE
UNITED STATES (ALL FORMS).
                                                                   THE BIG PICTURE       17



that the energy consumption h.as a "doubling periodot of 20 years,* This
Is indeed a frightening rate of growth, which is due in part to population
growth and in part to technological changes C'technoJogical advance"
might be more appropriate, but this implies a particular set ofvaluest).
Figure 1.7 shows the per capita energy consumption in the United States
over this period. Note that this was fairly constant during the period of the
Industrial Revolution and has risen slowly since 1900, with a doubling
period of about 50 years. (The doubling period for the United States
population during this time was about 30 yean;.)




                                                                          -j




                                            '~
                                         1900                            tooo
                                         Year
FJG. 1.7 CONSUMPTION or
ENERGY {ALL FOAMS) BY THE
UNITED STATES PER DAY FER
PERSON.



    One of the important energy sources is natural gas. Figure l .8 shows
the rate of consumption of natural gas in tl1e United States. The straight
line drawn for comparison has a doubling period of 10 years, which we
see is about the doubling period for United States consumption of natural

* There- is a frightening aspect about anything if its use doubles every so many years.
Consider the series I + 2 - 4 't'" 8 + 16 + · · ·, N:ote that each number i.s mDTI! tJum the
swn ef all ptnriuu.1 num~ers! Hene:e, in the period in which 16 of the quantides were used,
nwre wer£ wed than in all pn:vWus time! Thus, every 20 yean the United States consumes
more ertergy than in the sum of all previous 20·yeat periods! Think about the implications
of this ''doubling law" on a population that doubles every 30 yf".U'S.
18    ENERGY: FROM NAiURl: TO MAN



      20,··

~

      10!::-
 "
.!"    a~,_
       6:-
                                                             ~
 ()
ii       ,_
::;
 ()    '! r -
                                                              .J'
0                                                               I




                                                             _,I
                                                                I




                 .L               .l .......... _ ... -·--·L--~ I
                 1900            1925              1950
                                 Year
FJG. 1..S CONSl_;~~PT!ON OF
NATURAL GAS IN THE
UNITED STATES. THE LIGHT LIN£
HAS A 10-YEAR DOUBUf\G PERIOD


gas. Figure 1.9 shows the annual electrical energy output from central
power stations in the United States. These data display growth with a
doubJing period of only l 0 years! Most of the po\ver was produced from
fossil fuels> and hence it is not surprising that the doubling periods for
natural-gas consumption and electrical-energy production are about the
same,
   The history of the total energy utilization in the United States in the
period 1850-1970> with sornc extrapolations~ is shown in Fig. L 10,
Note that the time required for a new energy source to gro¥l to the point
where it is a significant factor is of the order of ~10 years. This is clearly
seen for coal, oil, and gas, and we are in the initial stages of the gru\vth of
nuclear energy at the present tlme. One should learn from history;
what does this record suggest about the likelihood of converting the United
States energy system to a solar-energy base in a period of 10 or 20
years?
                                             THE BIG PICTURE   19



        '
       2'-

        1




             Hydro




                                               _!
  0.005f-



  0.002f-      Oil
                                               1
        i        Gas                             ,.
   0.001 LL~ .L~..~.......-~-- ...J. ___ ~-~-···
       1900 1920          1940           1960  1980
                             Year

FIG. 1.9 HISTORY OF ELECTRICAL
E\!ERGY GENERAT'ON IN THf
UNiTED STATES.
20   ENERGY· FROM NATURE TO MAN



     1so
           1 ~----·- --··---

           [




FIG. 1.10 CONTRIBUTION OF
VARIOUS E:-JEAGY SOURCES -o
THE AN!\IUAL ENERGY
CONSU~.~PTION IN THE
UNITED STATES.

    1'hc history of the electric power industry .in the United States is very
interesting. Whereas in some countries hydrode<::tric power once out~
ranked power generation from fossil fuels, and in some it still docs, this
v.·as never true in the United States. On Sept. 30~ 1882, the country's
first hydroele<:tric station began operation on the Fox River- in Wisconsin;
this plant had the capacity of 12,500 watts, only enough to light a fe\v
hundred street lamps. However, 26 days earlier the first fueJ~buming
power station was started up in ~fanhattan} with an installed capacity of
33,200 \vatts, to power a line of 400 light bulbs of 83 watts each. For a
long time hydroelectric plants contributed about 30~{, of the nation's
growing eiectrical~energy supply, but after World War II the importance
of hydroelectric power diminished, By 1970, the mix of electrical~enqgy
generation in the United States was about as follows:
   Hydroelectric       16~/0
   Fossil fuel         76%
   Nuclear            ~8%
                      100%
                                                          THE BIG f'ICiUl'lE   21



   Figure 1.9 also sho\vs the history of rJcctrical-encrgy generation by
hydroelectric power stations, various sorts of fossil-fuel-burning power
stations, and nuclear power stations, In addition, industry generates
some electrical energy for jts own use-sugar mills burn the trash to make
the steam that generates the energy that runs the mill that grinds the
cane that makes the trash, ..\gain note the sinall contribution of hydro-
electric energy and the rapid growth in the generation of electrical energy
from nuclear-energy sources. Indee..d, the rapid expansion of the nuclear~
po"'·er industry provided considerable stimulation for the ongoing heated
debate over national energy policies.




     lfeavy
  - , i1id~(-strv




                    .!
FIG. 1.11 APPROXIMA'E
DlSTRIBUT!O'.'.J OF ELEC"'."RICAL
ENERGY IN THE UNITED STATES.


    Where did all the electrical energy go? Figure].] I shovvs the uses of
clectrica! energy in 1970. Residential uses account for about 35% of the
electrical energy. Industry is the- primary consumer of electrical energy
 (about 70%). \'Ve saw earlier that_!f:'tttlsportation was a major _c-0nsumer       ~-
of energy, but no\;';~arn that only a small portion of eiectriCat        energy--
is used by transportation (most of the transportation system runs on
fossil fuel and not electricity), This suggests that a serious effort at electri~
fication of our transportation system (including autornobiles) v.·ould have
a drastic impact upon the distribution and consumption of electrical
energy. Electrification of residential heating would also have a big effect
and could easily quadruple the residential consumption of electrical
energy. Continued growth of aluminum and titanium production, which
uses gobs of electrical energy~ could keep the industrial consumption
large, Hencej it is not easy to tell precisely how the distribution of electrical
energy will change over the next decades '\.Vithout first doing careful analy-
ses of the important users of electricity. But the established trend of .a
22   ENER~Y·   FRON! NATURE TO f>AAN



I O~year doubling in the demand for clectricaJ energy is likel;· to continue
to the end of this century unless basic policy decisions force a change.
    Earlier \.Ve cited the outputs of the first two linited States electric
power stations. 'l~hings have reaHy changed; a large fossil-fuel-burning
power station, such as the Pacific Gas and Electric Company plant at
~1os.i Landing, <::alif. (Fig. 1.2). is capable of 'producing around
2>000,000,000 watts of electrical power-two inillion kilowatts !-two
miHion toasters! With so many zeros, the term megawatt (million~watt),
abbreviated Mw (m..,1v usually means milliwatt, or thousandths of a watt
be careful!), is used. So plants today have installed capacities as large as
2,000 Mw.
    Now that you know megawatts, you had better learn gigawatts>
abbreviated Gw, which stands for 10 9 watts~ or a thousand megawatts.
Large plants have an installed capacity of a couple of gig-.otwatts. Today
there are of the order of 3,000 central power plants. Few are as large as
2i000 A1w; 350 Mw is a typical size for many of the more recent instaHa·
tions, If we divide the 1970 electrical--energy consumption of l.5 x 10 12
kwhr by 8, 760 hr, which corresponds to one year, we can compute the
average electrical polh'Cr in the United States over the year as 1.7 x 10 8
kw, or 170 (iw. Now, the power-producing capability of the plants in the
United States must be more than this, because not all plants operate at
full power all the tllne {the <le1rurnd for power varies). Indeed, the installed
capacity in the United States in )970 was about 300 G\v, slightly less than
twice the average power for the year. If the 3,000-power-plant figure is
about right~ tbe "average" plant has an installed capacity of about 0. l
Gw, or about 100 Mw. This sounds about right; there are many older,
smaller plants, and relatively few 1- and 2~gigawatt behemoths.
    Until we find ways to alter the growing de1nand for electrical energy,
or until nature limits the sources of energy, new power plants must be
built each year. Westinghouse has estimated that between 1970 and 1990
the United States utility companies will have to add more than 1,000 Gw
of ne\V capacity; about half of this wHI represent the annual average, or
"'base load," which \vill be added to the l 70«Gw figure tl1at we calculated
earlier. Much of this growth wiH be concentrated in nuclear power stations.
In 1970, there were some 22 nuclear power plants in operation, 55 under
construction) and 40 on order. Legislation that would delay the construc-
tion of these ne\.v plants has been seriously prop<)sed and hotly debated;
you can see from these numbers that the impact of such la\•ls ¥/ould be
enormous, and no decision should be reached lightly or v.ithout careful
consideration of all the pertinent issues.
    i:orecasting the nature ofour energy~utilization patterns several decades
ahead is currently fashionable. To do this accurately requires a v~ry care-
ful and complete analysis of su<:::h things as petroleum reserves, nuclear
                                                                  THE BIG PICTURE   23




energy, fusion power potential 1 personal life styles, and the values of the
society. At one time there was a scare that the fossil-fuel supply would be
e..xhausted before the end of this century. Careful analysis suggests this is
not the case but that our present rate of expenditures of fossil fueJs 1 to-
gether with the projected growth .in demands for energy, will indeed
exhaust these sources in a matter of a few centuries. Without other energy
sources, the technological age will be over before it has started, and will
be almost invisible on a geological time scale. 'I'o illustrate the problen),
let's suppose that we have now extracted 0.01°/o (one-ten-thousandth) of
the earth's fossil-fuel reserves, and that the doubling period for consump-
tion is 10 years.* A little calculation shows that in about 13.3 doubling
periods~ or 133 years, it will all be gone. No'i-v, our estimate of 0.01 %
may be high (or low) by a large factor. Suppose instead we have so far
used 0.000001 ~{i of the fossil fuels; with a 10-year doubling period, it will
all be gone in only 266 years! Our great-great-grandchildren have a
problem that we must help them solve now!


WHERE DOES IT COME FROM?

   The original source of energy for us on earth is our sun. Let's apply the
i.energy-balance technique 0 to the earth; the system V.'C shall analyze is
shown in Fig. 1.12. The energy balance, taken over a period of l year, is

                                                                                  (1.7)

Ein, the "income energy," is due almost entirely to the radiant energy
received from the sun (moonlight and starlight are not significant) except
as stimuli of interpersonal communication). The moon and sun provide
a small but important part of Em to drive the ocean tides. The earth l




                                              FIG. 1.12     E\JERGY FLOWS :::oR
                                              THE EARTH.


• 'Ihe use of a Iixed doubling P'"riocl. overemphasizes the difficulty,
24   ENERGY: FROM NATURE -:-o MAN



being a fairly warm body, radiates energy to space. 'Ibe atmosphere,
the mantle, and the core of the earth are all changing temperature very
slowly and undr-rgoing chemical and nuclear changes (with our un-
solicited help), and these changes appear in the energy balance as 4Esiored·
   Let's suppose for a moment that the sun suddenly went out, making
Ein = 0. Then lhe energy baJance would reduce to

                                                                        (L8)
Recall that means "final minus initial," so that AEst<Ylcd represents the
change in the earth's energy over a year (the period of the energy balance),
and Eq. (1.8) tells us that this 1nust be a negative number. We could exist,
for a ti1ne, without a sun, but the earth would quickly cool through the
tctm Eout•
    This discussion is somewhat 1nislcading, because the rate at which
energy can be transferred from the core of the earth to the surface, where
we live, is very slow relative to human life processes. More insight can be
obtained by analyzing just our surface Jayer, called the ';biosphere.''
\.Ye have identified the important energy flows to and from the biosphere
on Fig. 1.13, The energy balance on the biosphere, again over a I-year
period, is
                                                                        ( 1.9)
Hcre the terms represent, in order, the solar-radiation-energy input ~Eiron),
the tidaI-energy input by the moon and sun (.E'iides)• the energy input from
the earth's core by natural geological processes (ffge-0), the energy input
from the core by man's consun1ption of fuels (h.fuc1), the energy radiated
to space &om the earth (Erad), antl the change in energy storage in the



Iii tides

            ~




FIG, 1.13 ENERGY FLOWS FOR
THE BIOSPHERE.
                                                       7HE BIG PICTURE     25




hiosphece (dE'biosphere)· Some of these quantities have been measured
quite precisely, and others can be estimated fairly closely. It is convenient
to think in terms of the average powers for the year; we'll denote these by
Psun• Ptides' etc. Their values are as follows:

   P,un = 1.73 X 1017 watts
   P1idtt = 3 x 10 12 \Vatts
   Psro = 32 x 1011 watts
   P'"'' ~ 6.3 x 1012 watts (1970 figure)
Now, the biosphere is very nearly in an energy balance, and L\Eomphere                J
is very small (you can verif}· this by estimating the power that would be
required to warm up all the carth~s oceans at the rate of l<:>C per hour,
and compare this ¥tith the figures above). So, the output energy is very I
nearly in balance with the input, which is due aln1ost entirely {at present) /
to the radiated solar energy. It is interesting to note that rnankind already
 uses about twice as much energy as the n•oon and sun deliver to the ocean's
tidal flow!
    Let~s see how far mankind can go without a serious impact upon the
 world environment. A large fraction of Psun does nothing but keep the
biosphere warm; about 233, or 0.4 x 1017 watts, is used to evaporate
water, drive the winds, etc., and we certainly don't want to make a
substantive in1pact on that (01te theory of the ice ages suggests that very
small changes in Er.un and Erad were responsible for these major changes
in the earth's climate). Suppose it is possible to build up man's use of
energy to an equivalent ave.rage power of6 x 1015 watts. This is a factor
of 1,000 over the 1970 value·. (}rowth by a factor of ltOOO is obtained in
only lO doubling periods; for a 10-year doubling period, this is a span
of only 100 years. In only about 150 years Pruc1 would grow to the mag~         '1·


nitude of P$U.fl' should the l O..year doubling period continue! Obviously
                                                                               1
we cannot continue, and must face up to the technical and political )
aspects of drastic changes in our energy utilization.
    You should note that the energy balance on the biosphere [Eq. (1.9)]
relates to energy flo\.VS to and from the biosphere. Any exchanges of energy
that take place within the biosphere do not show up in this: over.tll energy
accounting. So, if we can :find ways to capture sorr1e of P fl.Un early in the
chain of energy transfer within the biosphere, use this energy for our
purposes, and then return the energy to the biosphere> the overall balance
will not be upset. If mankind really feels it needs to increase its energy
consumption by a thousand-fold, \vhich the 10-yea.r doubling history
says we will do in merely one century, then ways to use solar energy-must
2.6    ENERGY: FROM l\ATlJRE TO MAN



be rest:>arched, developed~ engineered) built, and placed into operation
on a gigantic scale. It will cost a lot more than a dozen trips to the moon.
   To summarize, all our energy ultimately came or comes from the sun.
When we burn fossil and nuclear fuels, we use precious energy reserves
that took millennia to create. If instead we can take advantage of income
energy, we will have the opportunity for substantial but not unlimited
increases in the energy available for our use. To know what to do, what
positions to take in debates about energy, to know how to vote on issues
relating to energy, we must develop a good understanding of these matters
and of energy technology, and that is what the rest of this book is all
about.


PROBLEMS

Getting used to numbers

 1.1    A certain macl1.ine requires 24 kw of clectricaJ power. How many Btu of
        energy dQes it use in an 8~hr working day?

 1.2 A householder heater has an output rate of I00,000 Btufhr. The homeowner
     wants to replace this with an electrical unit; determine the kw rating of an
     clectr1caJ unit that delivers energy at the same rate.

 13 A residential watt-hour meter had the following readings:
           April 22            19,273,42'7 watt~hr
           May22               19,383,792 watt~hr
        Determine the am-ount of electrical energy1 in kwhr and in Btu, used in this
        residence during this periQd, and the average electrical power.

 1.4 A factory luw the foUowing power~time history:
            $ A.M.~JJ A,M,                 790 kw
           I I A.M.- 2 l'.M.              360 kw
            2 P.M.~ 5 P,M,               1,370 kw
            5 P.M.- 8 P.M,                 460kw
            8 P.M.- 8 A.M,                 120kw

        Calculate the daily energy expenditure, in kwhr and in Btu.


Forecasting

 1.5 Starting with the 1910 United States electrical-energy conswnption figure
     of l.5 x 1012 kwhr, and assuming a JO-year doubling period for the
     sub&equent 30 years, estimate the annual eleetrical-energy consumption for
     the period 1970--2000. Plot this on semi.log paper, and read the predicted
     consumption for 1985.
                                                            THE BIG PICTURE      '1:1



 1.6 Using the solution to Prob, J.5~ calculate the amount of electrical energy
     (kwbr} that will be consumed in the three lO~year periods of the 1970s,
     1980s, and 1990s, and relate these to the "doubling law" di.scussed in
     Chap. !.
 1.7 Suppose the growth in the United States consumption of electrical energy
     <:an be reduced iu a manner that doubles the doubling period every
     doubling period, with double the 1970 rate of L5 x 1012 kwhr being
     consumed in i980~ and then double this in 2-000, etc. Forecast the annual
     demand for t!lectrical energy on this b~i>is~ and compare the proj~tion fQI'
     2050 with that calculated for Prob. l .5.
 1.8 Using the fOreca.st of Prob. 1.5. how many 1,000-Mw power plants will have
     to be constructed between 1970 and 2000 to meet the projected demand at
     the tum of the century?
 1,9   Using the foreca..;t of Proh. J.7, how many l,-OOO~Mw power plants will
       ha'\'e to be constructed between 1970 and 2000 to meet the projected
       demand at the turn of the century?
1.10 Suppose 0.1 % of the income energy from the sun <:an be harnessed for use
     by man1 and that in the brave new world of A..D. 3000 each nation's sbare is
     aHotted in proportion to itS land mass. What would be the United State.'5
     annual energy share (in Btu and kwhr) under this arrangement, assuming
     that the United States is the same size in the brave new world? Compare
     this with the current expenditure and with the year 3000 forecast based on
     the assumed 20..ycar doubling period.

Using the library
l.11   A good university library will contain a great deal of information relating
       to WO!"ldwide energy consumption, Locate the major sources of such
       information: in your library, and prepare a short anDQtated bibliography
       identifying there sources and indicating the sort of infurmation available in
       each.

1,12   Locate the ''Minerah Yearbook/' vols. I-II, published by the Bureau of
       Mines. Look up the annual demands for petroleum energy in Btu (e.g.,
       page 28 in the 1967 volume), and plot on lremilog paper for the period 1940
       to the present. Determine the doubling period at present, and compare this
       with information cited in Chap. L
1.13 UsJng the source for Prob. 1.12, plot the annual use of petroleum energy
       for transportatiOn since 1940, relate this to .information presented in
       Chap. l~ and di.~uss implications.
l,14 Do Prob. L 12 fur coal.
1.15 Dsing the data source of Prob. 1.12 1 make a semilog plot of the annual
     consumption of a mineral of your choice, determine the doubling; period,
     and discuss the relationship of this to the material in Chap. I.
28     ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN



Keeping the Gnergy books
1.16 Consider a household refrigerator. Draw a "system" diagram, showing the
     important energy flows that occur when the refriger'ator is in operation.
     Write the energy balance in simple terms. What happens to the electrical
     energy put into the system?
1.17    Consider an idling automobile engine in a car standing stiU. Dr.tw a
        "system" diagram and show the energy flows. Write the energy balance in
        simple terms. If the engine is operating at "steady-state" oonditions, what
        happens to the energy that comes in with the fucl?
1.18 Draw the system diagram for an electri.c coffee pot, and show the energy
     :flows. Write the energy-balance equation ln simplest ter1ns. Does your
     energy balance :include enough terms to explain what happens when the
     pot i$ turned off?
1.19 Write an energy balance on yourself over a period of one day, using an
     appropriate :•system." What happens to the energy :hat you take on with
     food?
l.20   An irrigation pump circulates v.•ater from the bottom of a hill to a small
       reservoir at the top. Define an appropriate system 1 write the energy
       balance) and rclate the electrical energy input at the pump motor to the
       change in the energy of the water moved by the pump. \'\t'hy is the motOt'
       needed?
 IT ALL STARTS
WITH MECHANICS


         fn which \.l.•e learn some of
         the science of energ'y and
       something about how to use it




THE CONCEPTION AND QUANTIFICATION OF FORCE
It is time now to start bcing more precise in our thinking about the science
of energy. If you are an engineer or scientist, you may already have a
good grasp of the material that we will cover in the chapter. Please read
it anyway-you may find some simpJe new ways to explain things in
your life to your nontechnical friends!
    In order to understand energy, one must first understand the concept
of farce. Think by yourself for a moment, and try to give a definition for
•;forcen, , . (these dots represent your thoughts). If you were able to
write down what to you seems an understandable definition, you have
somehow deluded yourself. Force, like any other concept, is something

                                                                         29
30   ENERGYo FROM NATURE TO MAN



that cannot be precisely defined but must be understood from the start.
   The statement that .,a force is a push or a pull" helps one get a feeling
for furce, but it i.s not an airtight definition; what, after all, is a push but a
particular type of force? Pulls and pushes tend to· move things (more
precisely to change the motion of things), and so forces must be useful in
explaining motion. Pushes are the opposite of pulls, and so forces must
have some sort of directional characteristics. A force must have a point of
application and certainly a magnitude. But these are only some of the
features of force.
    Figure 2. 1 will help us to understand another aspect of the force
concept. The man on the diving board in Fig. 2, la pushes the board
down a certain distance. l'he large rock on the board produces the same
deflection, It makes no difference to the board whether the man or the
rock is there; the deflection dis the same. We can remove the man and
replace him by the rock, or we can replace him by a uforce" F, which
measures the strength of his interaction with the board. In Fig. 2.lc we
show this replacement; the dotted lines show the ' 1system,, on which we
are focusing, which excludes whatever it is that produces the force. So,
another character of force is that it is something that we use to replace the
interaction between a system and its environment when we mentally
remove the environment to focus on the system.




           (a\                                 (b)




           (c)                                (d)
FIG. Z.1 FORC£S ARE USED TO
REPRESENT THE PUSHING OF
SOMETHING ON SOMETHING ELSE
(a} Tt<E MAN PRODUCES A
CERTAIN DEFLECTION. (b) THE
ROCK PRODUCES THE SAME
DEFLECTION. {c} EITHER CAN BE
REPLACED BY A FORCE (d) AN
EQUAL BUT OPPOSITE FORCE ACTS
UPWARD ON THE ROCK.
                                        IT All STARTS WITH MECHANICS        31



    The board also exerts a force on the rock. If we focus on the rock
(:Fig. 2. Id), we must shmv this force pushing upward on the rock. This
force will be equal in magnitude but opposite in direction to the force
that the rock exerts on the board. ''Action equals reaction,'' perceived
Isaac Newton. ls this statement an experimental fact, or is it part of the
concept of force? Jf you think this question through, you will find that it
is impossible to make an experimental test of the statement until you
know how to quantify forces, and you can't do that without invoking the
statement itself! If you push on a wall, you exert a force on the wall, and
the wall exerts the same force on you. The notion that action equals
reaction is part of the wncept of force (see Fig. 2.2).




                                                          (c}
FIG. 2.2 HAVE YCU EVER BEEN
PUSHED BY A WALL 7 (&} YOU·
PUSH ON A \VALL {b) YOU EXERT
A FORCE F ON THE WALL (c) THf
WALL EXERTS AN EQUAL BUT
OPPOSITE FORCE ON YOU.


   Let~s consider an object on which two forces act (Fig. 2.3a). The force
FA will try to produce acceleration (motion with increasing velocity)
to the right~ and F B will try to produce acceleration to the left. If the
object is not moving, it will tend to start moving in the direction that it is
pushed by the larger force, Tl1e body will remain motionless in spite of the
two forces only when the two forces are equal; i.e., if FA = F 8. We say
that the forces are "balanced." The notion that forces must be "balanced"
on an oq.iect that is not accelerating is another part of the concept of force.
Moreover, the forct".s can be "added," with due rr.gard for direction, to
determine the "net" force on the object. As we shall see momentarily,
           ~
--~-'·;;-.·      1......-.                            ,_,,,--·~·--
                                          C.,;~· - ..'.
   0,      __,           Fs
           {a)

FIG. 2.3   UNBAlANCEO FORCES
PRODUCE ACCELERAT!ONS. (a) THE
OBJECT WILL ACCt.lE.'iATE TO THE
AlGHT IF F_. >Fa. (b) THE OBJECT
WILL NOT ACCELERATE IF F,. =F•.
32   ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN.



it is these aspects of the concept that enable us to quantify fOrces in a
rational way.
    nwcight" is the do\vnward force that the earth's gravity exerts upon
matter. An upward force of equal magnitude is exerted by the matter
on the earth, If we define you as a system (Fjg, 2.4), we replace the earth
by two forces. First, we show the gravitation force W acting down on you,
and then \Ve show the earth pushing up on your feet with force F, If you
are off your feet, the force W \vill try to pull you down. When you jumpt
you make F larger than W, and hence a(:Ce)erate yourself upward until
your feet leave the ground.




     w
                 FIG. 2.4   FORCES THAT THE EARTH
                 fXERTS UPON YOU. TO JUMP.
     F           F > W.

    The concept of force becomes really useful when we can put numbers
to forces. One might be inclined to use a force·measuring scheme such
as that shown on Fig. 2.5. An unknown force is applied to the spring
scalc 1 and the amount of the force is read from the scale. The value of 1
on the scale would be determined by some standard force, such as the
weight of a brass brick, and the other numbers would be distributed
linearly along the scale. The trouble w.ith this scheme is that it depends
on the particular choice of spring; a br.m spring and a steel spring could
be made to agree at l but would give different values for larger or smaller
forces. Besides> it seems unreasonable that the measurement of something
as fundamental as force should depend on the whims of a spring-chooser.
A better scheme is shown in Fig. 2.6. Again a reference spring is used,
but this time it is used in only one deflected position. First; "''e place a
mark at the point where the force equal to the weight of standard brass




                            F
                                       FIG. 2.ti   AN UNSCIENTIFIC WAY
                                       TO QUANTIFY FORCE.
                                        IT ALL STARTS WITH MECHANICS       33




block deflects the spring by a certain amount; again this is our "unit
force.H Next, we find two perfectly matched springs (we can test this by
observing that they have identical deflections under the same force).
Then~ v.·c press these t\<lo springs against our reference i>pring, until the
unit position is obtained (Fig. 2.6b). By symmetry, the force exerted by
each of the two springs on the right must then be one-half of out unit
force (\vhich aspects of the fOrce concept did we use here?); we can
mark the deflection of one of these springs and use it to measure a half-
unit force. We can continue this process and get springs to measure furces
of one-third, one-twenty-ninth 1 etc., of our unit force; in principle \Ve can
colle<::t enough springs to measure any magnitude of force to any desired
degree of accuracy. In so doing we establish a unU;ue scale for force that is
fuliy consistent with the concept of force. This scale requires only one
standard point {lhc weight of the standard brass brick) to set the values
for all points on the force scale. While this is not the scheme used in
practiCe, the schemes that are used are all based on the same basic ideas.
The important thing to realize is that there are truly fun~mental ways
to quantify an scientific concepts, such as force.
    Now you should begin to get the feeling that force has some very
fundamental basis. Perhaps you also have the sense that science tries to
think very fundamentally and very clearly about such concepts, and that
your ability to use these concepts will be greatly enhanced when you do,
too. If so, you have our message.
    There are several units of force in common use today. You may be
most familiar with the pound) which \-Ve shall denote in this book by lbf
(pounds-force) to distinguish it from a mass unit lbm (pounds-ma!is) that
34    ENERGY FROM NA7URE TO MAN



we will encounter shortly. A pint of water weighs about one Ibf ("a
pint's a pound the world around"); since you are mostly water5 if you
know your \Veight in lbf, you can now estimate your volume in pints!
Other force units and their equivalences are given in the Appendix.
    ,-\ great deal of engineering involves consideration of forces. For
example, suppos.e one wond<>.rs whether a certain pile of bricks can be
lifted with a given cable. One first finds out the safe iifting load in lbf
for the cablci then the weight of the bricks~ and then makes the decision
based on these two numbers. Engineers make many choices like this
(most more complicated) in the design of liouses, bridges, automobiles 1
and space vehicle..s.
    The strength of materials depends upon the nature of the force.
Figure 2. 7 defines 11 tension,'' .:compression," and ;'shear,1' the three main
classifications of forces. Tension forces tend to elongate material, con1-
pr<:ssion forces tend to squash it, and shearing forces tend to skew it.
Note that tension and compression forces act perpendicular to the material
surface, and hence these are called Hnormal" forces {meaning perpen-
dicular and not non-queer). As: you live the next fe"v days, look around you
for examples of normal, shear, torsion, compression, and tension forces
to see how they arise and how they are balanced or used in a well-
engineered system.




         (a)                         (b)                             (c)
FIG. 2.7 TYPES OF FORCES,
i&) TENSION. {b) COMPRESSION.
(c) SHEAR.


    To determine if a cable \.\rill break> an engineer w.ill really be more
interested in the <;stresses" in the cable. Stress isf(IJ'ce per tmit area, and it
is the value of the stress that really determines the deformation and failure
of materials. For example, if the cable has a cross.-sectional area of 0.5
square inch (scientific types write thi'5 as 0.5 in 2 ) and carries a tension
force of 15,000 lbf, the stress in the cable fibers is
        _ F _ 15,000 Jbf _    OOO lb". ,
     s: - A - 0.5 in 2 - 30 '       l/tn

The engineer would then look up the properties of the cable material to
see if it could handle a tensile stress of 30,000 lbf/.in 2 • Most handbooks.
                                         IT ALL STARTS W!l'H ,\t(CHANlCS    35



give the failure stress in ~·psi;;; so you should know that "psi" stands for
"lbf/in. 2 .' 1
    In dealing 'With fluids (gases and liquids), the term 1'pressure" is used
to describe the normal stress. Pressure is a compressive stress that acts
perpendicular {"normal") to any surface in the fluid. The pressure is
independent of t11e orientation of the surface. If we define a "system'~ to
be a very sma1l cube of the fluid (Fig. 2,8), then the compressive force
is the same on each face of the cube, regardless of how it is tilted. The
pressure is this compressive force divided by the area of a cube face.




                          f<IG. 2.8 IN A FLUID THE NORMAL
                          FORCE PER IJNIT AREA IS
                          lNDEPEt\QENT OF DIRECTION.

   1'he pressure of the atmosphere is about l5 lbfilin 2 (14. 7 psi is closer).
Hence, the average individual receives a rather substantial push in the
belly from the air in front of him; fortunately this force is balanced by the
pressure force on his back, and hence he is not accelerated by an un-
balanced force (except perhaps on a very windy day when the pressure
forces do not quite balance).
    A piston engine (see Fig. 2.9} works because the presstm: in the cylinder
is grt"..ater than the pressure in the crankcase (\vhich is usually about
atmospheric pressure). This means that the do\i'nward force exerted by
the gas in the cylinder on the piston is greater than the upward force
exerted on the bottom of the piston by the crankcase gas, and this un-
balance causes the piston to move downward. This in tum cause$ the
piston to push on the connecting rod~ to turn the crankshaft, to turn the
driveshaft, to do usL-ful work. The gas pressure in a typical automotlve-
engine cylinder might be 200 lbf/in 2 and typical piston area 20 in 1 •




                     FtG. 2.9 THE PRESSURE 11\ THE
                     CYLINDER IS GREATER THAN THE
                     CRANKCASE PRESSURE; THIS
                     PUSHES THE PISTON DOWN.
3$    ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN



'fhe force exerted by the gas on the piston would then be
     F = PA = 200 lbf/in 2 x 20 in 2 = 4,000 !bf
 The mechanical parts must be carefully designed to carry such large
 forces.
     A bit of insight to the peculiarities of pressure gaugery may help your
 understanding of energy systems that you see. 11:te notation 11 psia" is
used to denote lbf/in 2 "absolute pressure," which is the true normal
force per unit area. :tviost pressure gauges do not read pressure directly;
ratherJ they read the amount by which the pressure is larger than the
atmospheric pressure around the gauge. The notation "psig'~ ("psi
gauge") is used to denote pressure levels above atmospheric pressure. Thus,
a reading of 50 psig \vould actually correspond to an absolute pressure of
50 + 15 = 65 lbfjin 2 • Most gauges are not careful!y marked; many say
"pressure in pounds" when they mean pounds per square inch above
atmosphere. Others say psi '\Vhen they mean psig. Barometers, of course,
read the absolute pressure of the atmosphere. rI'his is usually evaluated
in "inches of mercUiy" or "millin1cters of niercury," which refers to the
height of a column of mercury whose weight would produce the atmo~
spheric pressure at the base of the column. 1'ypical atmospheric pressures
are around 30 inches of mercury. Pressure gauges for vacuums (pressures
lr.ss than atmospheric pressure) usually read "inches of mercury vac,";
these indicate the amount that the test pres.">ure is less than atmospheric
pressure, expressed in terms of the pressure under an equivalent column
of mercury,

WORK

    Chances are you have at one time pushed a staUed automobHe; it
might be easy to push the car a few feet 1 but you would be exhausted if
you pushed the car a mile, The force that you need to exert on the car
is the same regardless of how far you push (on level ground it is deter-
mined by the rolling friction), but the longer the distance the more tired
you get; the farther you push, the more energy you expend.
    Let's consider the energetics of the car-pushing process. In :Fig. 2. IOa
we show your pushing force F acting on the car (there 1nay be other
furces on the car as well, but we shall focus just upon F). Suppose the
car 1noves a distance x in the direction of the force. The product of F
and x is a measure of the effort expended by F in contributing to the
n1otion of the car; this product is defined as the uwork done" by the force
on the car; denoting the work by W,
     W= Fx                                                           • (2.1)
                                        IT ALL STARTS WITH MECHANICS         37




                                         (a)




                                         (b)
FIG. 2.10 (a) PUSr1'NG A CAf1 =
HARO INQRK; \/\/ORK = Fx_
(bl ENERGY DIAGRAM FCR
THE PROCESS.


The harder the push for a given distance; the more the \VOrk; the greater
the distance for a given force, the greater the work.
    Since work is a measure of effort, it n1ust be a measure of energy.
Indeed, the notion of \'\'Ork plays a crucial role in the structure of energy
science; work prcvides the fimdamental rvay that IJze concept of ert£rgy is made
pantitative. \'Vhcn we say that the force F "did some work" on an object~
we really mean that "some energy was transferredn from the thing
producing the force to the object that moved (you expended energy to
push the car). The amount of energy transfer associated with this process
it defined by Eq. (2,l). Work, then, is an amoont oj~mergy transfer.
    For example, if you push with a force of 70 lbf and move a car a distance
of 200 ftJ you will pdo work on the car/' or equivalently Htransfer energy
to the car as work,"' in the amount

   W = Fx = 70 lbf x 200 ft = 14,000 !bf-ft                               (2.2)

Since work is energy transfer, energy and work have the same dimensions
{force times distance) and in the same units (lbf~ft, usually written as
ft-lbf).
    The energy balance picture for the car-pushing operation is shown in
Fig. 2.lOb. The energy input terin is the work W; assuming there are no
energy outflows, this must be balanced by the increase in energy storage,
The energy balance is then

   H' = AEcar                                                             (2.3)
38     ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN




                                                                      .   ./-~.~~
                                                                ~i(''-.. =~=-~
 --=---- -l- --- -------
  x                                                               ·-------.---·-----·
          0                                    -/00 ft                    -200ft
                                                         ( •)




                                                         (b)
FIG. 2.11 {a:} YOU MOVE IN THE
OPPOSITE DIRECTION TO THE
FORCE EXERTED ON YCU BY THE
CAR_ (b) SO, THE CAR DOES
"NEGATIVE WORK" ON YOU, LE ..
YOU DO POSl"71VE WORK ON THE
CAR.

This states that the energy that you put into the car as work must show
up as increased energy within the car. Part of this increase would be in
the energy of motion of the car; the rest would be in the increased energy
of the tires~ which 'lv-ill get hotter as a result of friction.
   Let's tum the car problem around, and focus on you as a system {Fig.
2.11). Now we must be careful; in the definition of work, x is the distance
that the matter on which the force acts moves in the direction of the force.
In Fig. 2.11 we show a c:oo-rdinate axis pointing in the direction of the
force that the car exerts upon you; as the car moves 200 ft to the right,
this coordinate changes from 0 to minus 200 ft. So~ the distance that you
move in the direction of the force acting upon you is ,~ 200 ft, and the
energy transfer as work lo youfrom the car is

      701bf x (-200ft) = -14,000ft-lbf                                                (2.4)
Note that the work done Ml you is negative; this means the work done
by you is positive) as common sense indicates, \¥e denoted the work done by
you as W, Then, the energy balance on you (Fig. 2.1 lc) is

       O=W+AE,••                                                                      (2.5)
     energy    <mergy      lrn:::ttase in
     input     outpUt      eneri)' storaJ;:e

Recall that AEyClU = Eyoufinal -                 Eyouinitiah so that Eq. (2.5) says

     Eycu tl:nlll =   Eyzyij initial ·    W                                           (2.6)
                                           IT ALL STARTS WITH MECHAN1CS          39


Thus, the energy stored within you decreases by an amount of W, and the
energy stored in the car increases by an amount J1'. It all makes sense1
doesn't it?
    What happens if we take a third system, consisting of both you and the
car (Fig. 2.12)? Now the force between you and the car is internal to
the system; it will not appear in the system energy balance, just as the
forces in bolts in the car or the forces in your bones and muscles did not
appear before. The only forces that can result in energy transfer across the
boundaries ef' lht vstem are those for1;es which act across tke l>uundaries ef the
~stern. This explains why engineers are so fussy about using dotted lines
to carefully show their sys.tern boundaries; ies a good practice that makes
for clear, accurate thinking.




                                           FlG. 2.12 YOUR PUSH IS INTERNAL
                                           TO THIS SYSTEM. ANO DOES NOT
                                           CHANGE THE SYSTEM ENERGY,


      Have you been worried about other forces on the car or on you?
 There is certainly a large weight force acting downward on the car and a
 large upward force on the tires. Neither of these forces does any work on
 the car, because the car does not mQve in the direction in v1hich these
 forces point. The same goes for the vertica1 forces on you, But what about
 the horizontal traction forces on your shoes and on the tires? Unless you
 kick up dirt, you really don't move the earth and hence do not do work
 on the earth with your feet. So no energy-transfer term need be shown
 at your feet. Similarly) unless the car is skidding, the tire surface on the
 road is at rest with respect to the earth, and hence the matter on which the
 roadway traction force acts docs not move in the direction of this foree.
 So, there is no energy flo\v term required there either. Werk is done by
forces cntf wlwt the material cm u1hich. thqse forces acts moves in the direction ef
 th.t jMce, Otbern-ise 1 there is no work done and no energy transfer.
      \Ve bave emphasized that work is determined by the motion of matter
 within the system. Motion is a relative thing, and so therefore is work.
 (Jareful energy analysis requires clear choice and definition of the "refer..
 ence frame. n For example, in a reference frame attached to your moving
 car the car has no motion. Hence, a rider in your car could claim that
 you may have pushed like crazy, but relative to him you did no work
 on the car! However, he should commend you for your efforts at pushing
 the earth backward, and would compute the amount of energy that you
 pushed into the earth as 14,000 ft-lbf. In his reference frame he would
 see an energy inflow to the car from the earth at the tires, and this is
40     ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN



what he would use to explain the increase in energy stored within the
car. ('y0od energy bookkeepers get the same quantitative results regard~
less of the reference frame that they choose for their analysis, Considerate
bookkeepers take the troubJe to teJJ the auditors what they are doing;
so be sure to define the reference frame if there is any posmble question.
    How would you go about evaluating work when the force varies as the
object moves? Figure 2.13 shows the way. One divides the motion up
into a number of small steps~ computes the amount of energy transfer as
work for each step, treating the force as constant over each small step,
and then adlls these up to get the total amount of energy transfer as work.
You can see that the total work done by the varying force F as the object
rnoves from point a to point h is approximately the area under the curve,
and if the little steps in x are taken small enough, the sum of the work
steps will become exactly the area under the curve. If you have studied
calculus, you \Nill recognize this process as "integration,"

  t
  l
  f
FI
  '




FIG. 2.13   THE TOTAL WOHK DONE IN GOING FROM A TO 8 IS THE AREA
l!'JDER THIS CURVE: rv = F1(X]: -   X1}   + F2\K~. - Xz) + . ' ..

    Recall that power is the time rate of transfer of energy. flenceforth
we shall use a dot over a symbol representing energy to denote a raJ.e of
energy flo\V; SO w~ wiJ1 represent the rate of energy transfer as work}
i.e., the pnweT. If it takes 2 min to push the car 200 ft with the 70 lbf push,
then the power that is being delivered to the car during this period is

      W = W = !4,000 ft-lbf = 7,000 ft-lbf/min
            t       2mm
One horsepower is defined as 33 1000 ft-lbf/min; so you delivered a.bout
7,000/33,000 = 0.2 hp, This is a good figure to remember~ at your best
                                           IT All STARTS WITH MECHANICS   41



you are about a quarter horse i You can look in the Appendix for a
conversion factor, and convert your 0.2whp capability to kw.
    To summarize, work proves the fundamental quantitative measure of
energy. The amount of energy transfer to a system by a force that acts on
the system is the product of the force and the distance that the matter on
'vhich the force acts moves in the direction of the force. Only forces that
act across the boundaries of tbe system are involved. Good practice
involves careful and clear definition of the system and the motion
reference frame when one is analyzing energy flows as work.
    I~et's look at a sin•ple engine to bring the ideas discu$$ed above into
sharper fOCus. The engine, shown in Fig. 2.14, uses high~pressure air as the
"working fluid." When the piston is at its uppermost position ("top
dead center," or TDC) the intake valve opens and high-pressure air
rushes into the cylinder. rfhis high pressure pushes the piston downward.
and the intake valve remains open to let more air in during this down-
ward thrust. \Vhen ''botton1 dead centern (BDC} is reached, the intake
valve is closed and the exhaust valve opens) allowing the high~pressure
gas to escape to the atmosphere; reducing the pressure in the cylinder,
The inertia of the rotation then carries the piston upward, expelling more
air through the exhaust valve, At 1'DC the exhaust closes and the intake
opens, and we begin again. The pressures that might exist in the engine
are shown in Fig. 2, l 4b; Fig. 2.l4c shows a simplified approximation to the
cylinder pressures that we will use to calculate the energy delivered to
the crankshaft per cycle of operation. V\'e'll assume that the piston diam-
eter is 4 in and that the stroke is 6 in. Here folla\veth the engineering
calculations:
   Piston area:

         - - = -"X (4.In )'
      A ="D'                           12.5 in 2
          4     4
   /'<Orce on pUtrm during dowmcard stroke:
      F 1 = P 1 A = 200 lbf/in2 x 12.5 in 2 = 2,500 lbf
   Work done by high-pressure gas on pisron during the downward stroke:
      W, = F 1x = 2,500 !bf x 0.5 ft = 1,250 ft-lbf
   Fnrce on piston during upward stroke:
      F 2 = P2A "" 20 lbf/in 2 x 12.5 in' = 250 !bf
   Work dJJne by piston on low-pressure gas dun.ng the upward stroke:
      W 2 = F 2 x = 250 !bf x 0.5 ft = 125 ft-lbf
42    ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN




                                 la)




                                                     200 lbf/in:__l;

                                       "'" il
                                           '
                                                     zo tbflin' I
                                           l__i___~ ..-- --~- ---·~
                                                ~        x        ~
                (b)                                     (c)
FIG. 2,14 ANALYSIS OF A SIMPLE
ENGl!\IE. (a} ENGINE DESIGN, (b)
CYLINDER PAESSVRE CYCLf, (c}
Slt..'!PllFIED CYLINDER PRESSURE
CYCLE


     Net energy transfer as work to tke pi.sttm in one cycle:
        W, - W2 = 1,250 ft-lbf                  125 ft-lbf = 1,125 ft-lbf
t\ssurning that the crankcase pressure is constant, there is no net energy
transfer between the crankcase gas and the piston over one cycle. .Suppose
now that the engine runs at 2,000 .rpm ("revolutions per minute") and
                                                IT ALL STARTS WITH lv1fCHANICS             43



that there are six such cylinders. The power delivered to the pistons, which
except for friction will be the engine output power, is then

    W - l, 125 ft-lbf x 2,000 rev/min x 6 cyl = 13,500,000 ft-lbf/min
                cyl~rev

Converting to horsepower (see the Appendix for the conversion number),

     ,;
     1      13,500,000 ft-lbf/min _ .~ h
    n  -··                        --w"p
            33,000 ft-lbf/min-hp

Engineers delight .in making si1nple, useful calculations like these i if you
understand the concepts of force, work, and energyi you can share in
these pleasures. Calculations Jike these, but much more complex, are
an essential step in the design of any power system.


NEWTON'S LAW OF MOTION
   We have noted that forces tend to accelerate objects on which they acL
The Hmass" of the object is a measure of its ability to resist this acceler-
ation. Under the action of a given force, a massive body will undergo a
slower acceleration than a lighrer body. The ·~mass" M of an object is
defined by the relationship between forces on the body and accelerations
that they produce; this relationship is known as "Newton's second law
of motion." In physics books it is v.rrittm as

    F= Ma                                                                              (2.7)
Here Fis the farce on the object, Mis the mass of the object, and a is the
acceleration (time rate of change of velocity) that results when Fis the
only force acting upon the object. If we want to vie""· Eq. (2. 7) asa defining
equation for mass} \\o'hich is sometimes the vie\-1.'JX)int adopted, then*
        F
    M = -·                                                                             (2.il)
            a
In this view, to find the mass of an otriect one would apply a known force,
measure the acceleration, and then simply divide one by the other. The
dimensions of mass are then those of force divided by acceleration; and the
units then depend upon the units of force~ length, and time. _For example,
if Fis measured in lhf~ and a in ft/sec 2 , then M has the peculiar units of
lbf-sec 2 /ft. This combination has been termed the t•slug," and so by

• The mass of a body is independent of its speed of motion, except at velocitiel! approach;..
ing the speed of light (186,000 miles/sec). At such incredible llpeeds one needs to revi:te
his ooncepttl of length and time, and this wall the unique contribution of Albert Einstein.
                                              JT ALL STARTS WJTH MECl-<ANICS          45



makes it easy for engineers to determine the mass of something by weigh-
ing it>* which makes life easy for slow-witted engineers. The experi-
mentally determined value of gc in the engineering system of units is

    g, = 32.1? ft-lbm/lbf-sec 2

   To illustrate the use of Eq, (2.9), suppose we want to calculate the
magnitude of the force that is required to accelerate the 2,200-lbnl car
to 60 mph in 10 sec. Now, 60 mph corresponds to 88 ft/sec; so the
acceleration is

    a = velocity change/time = 88 ft/sec
                               ~---- = 8.8
                                           ft/sec 2
                                         10 sec

The IOrce, which will be exerted on the car by the roadway at the rear
tires, is then
                                 2
                       l lbf-sec
    F =_I_ Ma         -----
                      32.2 ft-lbm
                                  x 2,200 lbm x 8.8 ft/sec 2
        g,
                      600 !bf

    As a second example 1 suppose we drop a 100-lbfweight; hov.· fast wiU
it accelerate as it falls? Quickly determining the mass as 100 lbm~ we use
Eq. (2.9) and find

           F      . ft-lbm x IOO !bf = 32.2 ft/sec 2
    a=g"'li,.1= 32 2 lbf-sec 2 100 lbrn

This is the hacceleration of gravity/' usualJy denoted by g. Note that the
car acceleration of 8.8 ft/scc 2 corresponds to about 0.27g. You might
compute the force required to bring your car to rest from 60 mph in
0.1 sec, and then ask yourself if the vehicle and you would enjoy this
adventure.


KINETIC ENERGY

   \<\/hen we accelerate an object, we increase its ener-gy of motion,
commonly caUed its c'kinetic energy." Using the definition of work and
Newton's law discussed above, an expression relating the kinetic energy
to the speed of the object will now be derived. Consider an object being

• Within engineering a<:cw-acy this can be dQne at any p<;>int on earth, and one need not
take the thing to Las Vegas.                                                        ·
41     ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO V.AN




     F
                       (i'J)                      (b)

                                         .I.
  t                            f




'V__                  t
                     (c)
                                        Xi
                                          i
                                          Iv ,/
                                               ,.
                                                 ;·



                                               (d)
                                                  t

FIG. 2.16 SKETCHES USED IN
DERIVJNG THE EXPRESSION FOR
KINETIC ENERGY. {a} FORCES,
(b) ENERGY FLOWS, (c) VELOCl1Y
FOR CONSTANT F, {d) POSITION
FOR CONSTANT F.


accelerated by a force; Fig. 2.15 defines the system and shows the energy
flows. The energy balance on this system is
         w      ~          t>E                                          (2.10)
     m::iergy        incr~ in
     input           energy stm'lligt

The increase in energy storage wilJ be due to the increase in the kinetic
energy; denoting the kinetic energy of the body by E,., Eq. (2.10) becomes
     W= AE,                                                             (2.11)
If the body is initially motionless, it has no energy of motion, and
E 1 iD.itial = 0. Thus~ Et final represents the kinetic energy possessed by the
body when all of W has been put in. If we can derive an expression for-
W, Eq, (2.11) will immediately give us an expression for the final kinetic
energy E1:,.
     Lefs take the special case where ]? is constant, in which case Eq. (2.9)
teUs us that a is also constant. If we start fron1 rest} the velocity will in-
crease linea1·ly with time as indicated in Fig. 2.15c, 'l~he acceleration is
Vjt, where Vis the velocity at a particular time t as shown in the figure.
So, from Eq. (2.9), the force required to produce this acceleration is
        I V
     F= -M-                                                             (2.12)
                g,         I
                                         IT ALL STARTS WITH MECHANICS         47



Now, from Eq. (2.1), the work done by the force Fin the time period it
takes to reach Vis

   U"= Fx                                                                 (2.13)
v.·here x is the distance traveled in this time. Now1 the average velocity
over this time period is V/2; so the distance traveled is

   x = tVt                                                                (2.14)

Combining the three equations above, we obtain

   W =    .!_ (!MV 2 )                                                    (2.15)
          g,
:Finally, from the energy balance we see that this work is simply the kinetic
energy that the body has when it is mo-,.,.-ing with velocity V; so

   E4 = .!_ (jMV')                                                        (2.16)
          g,
Equation (2.16) is the general expression for the 0 translational kinetic
energy" of a moving body (if you have .studied calculus, you .should be
able to show that this same expression holds irrespective of how F varies
during the acceleration). You may have seen kinetic energy defined
elsewhere as !.i\..fi1·2 ; the gc jwt gives us the flexibility of using a variety
of unit systems (for the mks and cgs systerm, &c = I and Ek = tMV 2 }.
   For example, let's ca1cu)ate the kinetic energy of the 2,200-lhm car
moving at 60 mph (88 ft/sec);

                    1               1
   Ek = ------~2 x - x 2,200 lbm x 88 2 ft 2 /sec 2
          32,2 ft-lbm/lbf-sec      2

       = 265,000 ft-lbf

Neglecting friction, this much energy must be supplied by the motor to
accelerate the car from rest to 60 mph.
   As a second example of kinetic energy, let's estimate the kinetic energy
of the wind flowing through a windmill. A good windmill would capture
only part of this energy~ and so this calculation will give us an upper
limit on the energy that one could get from the wind. Figure 2.16 shows
the system. Suppose that the air velocity is V. In a tin1e interval t all
the air in the column shown will pass through Lhe windmill, and what
we want to do is calculate the kinetic energy of this rnass of air. A good
work style is to first develop an expression in algebraic form and then at the'
end put in some numbers. We'll follow this format here. If we denote the
48 ENERGY: FROt..'1 NATURE TO MAN




                 L ~Vt
                                          FlG. 2.16 CALCULATING THE
                                          POWER OUTPUT OF A WINDMILL.

windmill biade diameter by D, the cross-sectional area of the wind flow is

      nD 2
     A=-                                                                (2.17)
           4

Now, the length of the column is/., = Vt; so the volume of the cylinder of
air is

     Vo!= AL
                  nD'
                  -Vt                                                   (2. !8)
                   4

To get the mass of the air, we need to know the mass densiry of the air;
this is usually denoted by the Greek symbol p ("rho"), and for air at
normal atmospheric conditions p is about 0.074 lbm/ft 3 • That is, each
cubic foot of air has a mass of0.074 lbm. No\v, the mass of 1he air column
lS


     M=pXvol                                                           (2. 19)


The kinetic energy of this column is then, from Eq. {2. 16),


                                                                       (2.20)


To find the power, we simply divide the kinetic energy of the column by
t, the time it takes for the air column to pass through the windmill; this
is the maximum power that could be taken from the air by the mill,


                                                                       (2.21)


'fhis is a neat little formula; it tells us that the available power varies as
the cube of the wind velocity and as the square of the \-vjndmill diameter.
   Let's put in some nurnbers. A typical mill might have a diameter of
                                        IT ALL STARTS V\llTH MECHANICS     49



20 ft, and a light breeze might be 4 ft/sec. VVe'll use the air-density value
given earlier. Theni

                  n x 20 2 ft 2
                                       x 0,074 lbm/ft 3 x 4' ft' /sec 3
             8 x 32.2 ft-lbm11bf-sec 2

   Wm., = 23 ft-lbf/stt
Noting that one horsepolvcr ls 550 ft-lbf/sec, we sec that the maximum
power available from the windmiU is only about 23/550 = 0,04 hp!
However) suppose the wind is four times faster, at 16 ft/sec (rather brisk).
Then 1 tbe rnaximum pov..·er increases by a factor of 4 3 to about 2.5 hp.
It will still take a lot of windmills to run a farm!
   No real windmill could deliver the maxin1um power, The efficiency of
the windmill would be defined as the .ratio of the actual power to the
theoretical maximum; the efficiency is usually denoted by the Greek
symbol 11 ("eta"), and thus

                                                                       (2.22)

where JVmax is given by Eq. (2.21 ). A real \vindmill migl1t have an effi-
ciency of only 20<y.,. There has not been much research to develop better
windmiJls shnply because the a'\-'llilable energy is so very small.
   To summarize, kinetic energy is a mechanical form of energy asso-
ciated v.tith the motion of mass; its value may be computed from Eq. (2. 16).

POTENTlAL ENERGY

    Consider the weight being hoisted by tlu:~ cable in Fig. 2.17. As the
weight is lifted, energy is transferred to the weight as work/um? the cable
by the cable force Fr:. Also, energy is transferred from the weight to the
f'4rth's gravitational field by the action of the weight force F9 • The energy
balance on the weight system is

                                                                       (2.23)
                                                                                 "
where We and W" denote the energy transfCrs as work just described
(note that \.Ve presume that the motion is slow, so that the kinetic energy
is not important). Now: the work W., is

   W, = F,h                                                            (2.24)
50    ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN




                                                    (C)
FIG. 2.17 THE WORK DONE ON
THE EARTH'S GRAVITATIONAL FIELD
IS COMMONLY THOUGHT OF AS
AN INCREASE IN THE POTENTIAL
ENERGY OF THE WEIGHT.
(a) FORCE DIAGRAM. (b) ONE WAY
TO THINK OF ENERGY FLOWS.
(c) A MORE COMMON WAY TO
THINK OF ENERGY FLOWS.


where his the height that the weight has been raised. So Eq. (2.23) is

      we = energy
     energy
            Fgh                                                      (2.25)
     in       out

In this interpretation of the energy balance there is no change in the
energy of the weight. An alternative view in common use is based on a
reinterpretation ofEq. (2.25); since his zero initially, the above equation
is equivalent to

      we
     energy
                    A(F'gh)
              change in energy
                                                                     (2.26)
     in       storage

The term on the right in Eq. (2.26) is now interpreted as a change in the
energy stored within the weight, rather than an energy outflow to the
gravitational field as in Eq. (2.25). The "potential energy" of weight is
defined as

                                                                     (2.27)

where w is the weight force and h is the height that the weight is raised
above the ground. When using the potential-energy concept, energy
transfers as work by gravitational forces are not put into the energy
balance as work terms, but appear instead as changes in the potential
energy (see Fig. 2.17c).
    To illustrate the application of potential energy, consider a mass that
is dropped from a height h above the floor. Neglecting wind friction, there
                                                   IT ALL STARTS WITH MECHANICS   51




will be no energy transfers to or from the body during the free-fall period.
So an energy balance on the mass gives (see Fig. 2.18)

         0 =        0 + AE                                                   (2.28)
     energy       energy       change in
     in           out          energy storage


where E represents the energy of the mass, i.e., the sum of its potential
and kinetic energies,

                                    MV 2
     E = Ek + E                 = --        + wh                             (2.29)
                           P         2gc

So the energy balance simply says that the final and initial total energies
are the same. If the body is initially at rest with zero kinetic energy, and
if h = 0 at the end of the drop so that the final potential energy is zero,
we have

     Ek final = E p initial                                                  (2.30)

So

      1      2
     -   MVi1na1 =             whinitial                                     (2.3 l)
     2gc

The relationship between the weight and mass is given by Newton's law
[Eq. (2.9)] as (recall that the free-fall acceleration is g = 32.2 ft/sec 2 )

              I
     w =-Mg                                                                  (2.32)
        gc
52    ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN




Using this in Eq. (2.31) for w, and solving for Vimal

     vfinal =   .J2ghinitial                                           (2.33)

Note that it is g and not gc that appears in this expression, and that the
final velocity is independent of the mass of the body (remember Galileo's
fable about the feathers and the stones?).
   As a second example, let's calculate the potential energy of rain in a
cloud. Suppose the clouds at an elevation of 2,000 ft contain enough
water to dump 1 in of rain cin the ground below. For each square mile of
ground we will have (5,280) 2 x (l2 ) = 2.3 x 10 6 cubic feet of water.
The mass density of water is about 62.4 lbm/ft 3 ; so the weight density of
water is 62.4 lbf/ft 3 (do you see the subtle but important difference here?).
Using the definition [Eq. (2.27)], the potential energy of this water mass is

     EP = wh = 2.3 x 10 6 ft 3 x 62.4 lbf/ft 3 x 2,000 ft
                  =   2.9 x 10 11 ft-lbf

This is a lot of energy; the sun had to supply at least this much energy to
raise the water to the 2,000-ft level through atmospheric circulations.
Now, if this water falls in a deluge over a period of 100 min, the rate at
which potential energy is being released corresponds to a power of

     W = 2.9 x 10 11 ft-lbf/10 2 min = 2.9 x 10 9 ft-lbf/min
        = 87,000 horsepower

Remember that this is for l square mile. Perhaps someday clever engineers
will find ways to capture some of this energy, and rainpower will be one
of the ways that man utilizes the sun's energy more directly!
   Man's use of nature's elevation of water has so far been confined to
hydroelectric power, in which the potential energy of water in the
mountains is converted to electrical energy in hydraulic turbines. As a
final calculation eXample, let's estimate the hydroelectric power derivable
from a mountain river. Suppose the river is 50 ft wide, 20 ft deep, and has
an average flow velocity of 2 ft/sec. Suppose we plan to build a dam to
raise the elevation of the reservoir water 200 ft above the hydroelectric
plant. This is enough information to estimate the maximum power that
could be generated from this energy source. Figure 2.19 shows the system
that we analyze. We will compute the potential energy in the column
of water shown on the figure; this is the amount of water that will enter
                                            IT ALL STAATS WITH MECHANICS   53




                      '
                          ' ...._   -HYdrauift   /


                                     turb·1nes
FIG. 2.19 ESTIMATING THE POWER OUTPUT AVAILABLE FROM THE POTENTIAL
ENERGY OF A RIVER FLOW.


the reservoir in time t, which for steady conditions will be the amount
of water that is passed through the hydraulic turbines. Then we will
divide by t to get the power as in the windmill analysis. The volume of the
water column is

   Vol = AVt                                                          (2.34)

where A is the cross-sectional area of the river. Denoting the weight
density (lbf/ft 3 ) by the Greek symbol y ("gamma"), the weight of the
column is

   w    AVyt                                                          (2.35)

Now denote the height that we can drop the water by h. Then the potential
energy that we have available is

                                                                      (2.36)

and the power available is

   W     AVyh                                                         (2.37)

You might note that the product AV is the "volume flow rate,, in the river
(ft 3 /min) and the product AVy is the "weight flow rate" (lbf/min).
Often you can find data in this form for rivers in various areas.
54    ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN




     Let's put in the numbers:

     A = 50 ft x 20 ft = 1,000 ft 2

     W = 1,000 ft 2 x 2 ft/sec x 62.4 lbf/ft 3 x 200 ft
        = 2.5 x 10 7 ft-lbf/sec

We can express this in some other power units (you should check the
conversions if you don't do them easily),

     W = 2.5 x 10 7 ft-lbf/sec = 45,000 hp = 34,000 kw

So the available power from this station would be only 34 megawatts,
which you can compare with the 1,000-Mw outputs of large fossil-fuel
power stations. Perhaps now you can see why hydroelectric power is
relatively unimportant in the United States; there is just not much
hydroelectric energy available.               ~
    The "efficiency" of a hydroelectric power plant is the ratio of the actual
power produced to the theoretical maximum given by Eq. (2.37). Modern hydro-
electric plants have efficiencies of the order of 60%; so we might realisti-
cally expect to generate only 0.6 x 34 = 20 megawatts on our river.
What happens to the rest of the available energy is something that we
will learn more about in the next chapter.
    The preliminary engineering analysis for a proposed hydroelectric
plant will follow exactly the calculation we just made. First the maximum
available power will be calculated from the flow and elevation data,
and then the actual power will be computed using an efficiency based
on experience. There is nu magic to engineering calculations, just a
little science and lots of common sense!


TURBINES. PUMPS. AND COMPRESSORS

    Let's see how these ideas are incorporated in modern energy-conversion
technology. One of the earliest machines for producing useful mechan-
ical energy was the hydraulic turbine. In its earliest and simplest
form, water from a small stream was dumped onto paddles attached
to a rotating wheel. The wheel turned a shaft and the shaft turned a
grindstone or other tool requiring the input of energy as work. This
waterwheel has very simple energetics; the potential energy of the wate1-
is converted to kinetic energy during the fall. The impact of the moving
water on the paddles produces a downward force to turn the wheel,
                                        IT ALL STARTS WITH MECHANICS       55



and the motion of this force gives energy to the wheel as work. Per-
haps 10 to 20% of the potential energy available in the water flow
can be converted to work in simple devices of this type. Additional poten-
tial energy can be recovered in the wheel if the paddles are made more
bucketlike. The advance of waterwheel technology is indicated by the
modem Pelton wheel shown in Fig. 2.20. Water taken from below the
surface ofa reservoir, or from another high-pressure source, is fed through
a firehoselike nozzle, from which it emerges at a very high velocity
(perhaps 300 ft/sec). This jet impacts upon the buckets, is turned, and is
discharged with a much lower velocity relative to the nozzle. There is a
reduction on the kinetic energy of the stream as a result of this lowering
of its speed, and this is accounted for by work that has been delivered
to the buckets. Pressure forces on the fluid are required to turn it and to
slow it down; these pressure forces are provided by the bucket, and it is
these forces that push the buckets to turn the wheel around. A modern
Pelton wheel would have a maximum efficiency of conversion of potential
energy to useful work of about 80%.
                               Rotatin9 power•
   Needle                      shaft
   control valve
             ~




_,...   ..


High- p1·essure
tnlet
FIG. 2.20    PELTON-WHEEL SCHEMATIC.

    In "impulse turbines," such as the Pelton wheel, the fluid stream is
accelerated in a nozzle, but the flow velocity relative to the bucket does not
vary as the flow passes through the bucket. Another type of turbine
device is the "reaction turbine." Reaction turbines operate completely
filled with fluid and with "blades" on the rotor rather than buckets. The
area for flow decreases as the flow moves between the blades, and hence
the fluid is also accelerated with respect to the rotor within the blade
passages. This alters the pressures exerted by the fluid on the blades,
and the design is such that these pressures help push the rotor around.
    Let's think for a moment about the performance characteristics of an
66   ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN




                                                          ()
          rpm                                                          rpm
          (a)                                                          ( C}
FIG. 2.21 PERFORMANCE
CHARACTERISTICS OF AN IMPULSE
HYDROTURBINE. (a) TORQUE,
(b) OUTPUT POWER. (c) EFFICIENCY
OF CONVERSION OF FLUID ENERGY
TO SHAFT WORK.


impulse hydraulic turbine. The jet of water will squirt onto the buckets,
regardless of the bucket speed. The greatest force on the buckets will occur
when the wheel is prevented from rotating, but as the wheel speed in-
creases the force on the buckets will decrease. Thus, the torque-speed*
characteristics of the machine will look something like Fig. 2.2la. Note
that at a certain speed the torque will fall to zero; this is the speed at which
the buckets and the water really don't interact, for the buckets are moving
so fast that they just run with the water. Now, force times distance is
work; so force times velocity is power. You can derive for yourself the
relationship

     W = 2nTN                                                                 (2.38)

where W is the power output, T the torque, and N the number of revolu-
tions per minute of the wheel. Working from Fig. 2.2la, the power will
be a curve like Fig. 2:21b. Note that it will peak out at about half the
runaway speed, or at about half the water-jet speed. Hence, there is a
wheel speed at which the maximum power can be obtained. Since this
curve is drawn for a fixed jet speed and flow (i.e., for a fixed available
kinetic energy) the efficiency curve will be the same shape as the power
curve, and peak efficiency will also occur at the peak power point. The
rpm at this condition would be called the "design speed" of the machine.
    One always tries to operate a turbomachine at its design speed. The
power output can be controlled by adjusting the amount of water flow.
If too little power is demanded by the turbine load, the wheel will start
to speed up; if the load draws too much power, the wheel will start to
• Torque is the circumferential force times the radius to the force.
                                               IT ALL STARTS WITH MECHANICS              67



 slow down. In hydroelectric power stations, controls are used to sense the
 turbine speed and then to alter the water flow to hold the speed constant,
 automatically adjusting the output power.
    Steam turbines operate on much the same idea. High-pressure steam
is fed to nozzles, where it is accelerated, and then this high-speed flow
 (perhaps at 2,000 ft/sec) impacts upon turbine blades attached to a rotor.
The flow is turned and slowed down relative to the ground, and the
pressure forces to do this job are provided by the blades. The equal-but-
opposite forces on the blades push the rotor around, producing useful
power. Small steam turbines admit ste~m only to a segment of the rotor,
as in the Pelton waterwheel, while large turbines operate with "full
admission" of steam all around the perimeter. Most steam turbines are a
mix of impulse and reaction types, with the design being tailored to
achieve maximum efficiency for the application at hand. Figure 2.22
shows a large steam turbine; as the steam passes through the machine
and its pressure drops, the steam expands to take up more space. In order
to keep about the same flow velocities in the various stages of the turbine,
the low-pressure stages must have larger flow•areas, as is clearly evident
in the picture. Steam turbines are usually "axial-flow" machines, where
the basic direction of flow is along the axis of rotation. The nozzles
accelerate the flow to high velocity and introduce strong swirl, and the
idea is to capture as much as possible of the kinetic energy of the flow by
removing the swirl in the turbine-blade passages attached to the rotor.
    The "efficiency" of the turbine describes the fraction of the available
energy that is captured as shaft work.* Large steam turbines have peak
efficiencies of the order of 85%. In smaller turbines such as might be of
interest for automotive application, leakages, friction, and other effects
reduce the performance, and a machine in the range of a few tens of
horsepower might have an efficiency of only 60%.
    Gas turbines using air, helium, or other gas as the "working fluid"
are of increasing importance in energy technology. They are a key com-
ponent in gas-turbine engines, are well suited for power generation in the
range of tens of kw to a few Mw, and thus have growing industrial
applications. A significant number of trucks and busses are now powered
by gas-turbine engines, whose air-pollution characteristics and light
weight make them well suited for transportation uses. The performance
curves for gas turbines are similar to Fig. 2.21. Large gas turbines have
peak efficiencies of the order of 85%, while a machine in the power
range for automotive application might have an efficiency of around 80%.
• The efficiency of energy conversion in the turbine itself should not be confused with the
overall energy conversion of a gas-turbine engine, which would be 25 to 35%.
58   ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN




                                              Steam crossover
                                                    Intercept valve
                                                 ,_,,,-Reheat- inlet
                                                         Control valves

Low-




pressure
rot-or /       .
  i. p. casing/
 Va!ve _ , / / /

 Turbin{'
 middle
  standard
          /

                I
              High-
              pressure
              casing


FIG. 2.22 LARGE STEAM-TURBINE CUTAWAY. COURTESY OF THE GENERAL
ELECTRIC COMPANY.




   Gas-turbine engines have other turbomachinery components. The
engine requires high-pressure gas, which is obtained by compressing the
intake flow. Aircraft engines normally employ "axial-flow" compressors,
which look something like axial-flow turbines operating in reverse. The
flow enters the compressor without swirl, and high-velocity swirl is
imparted to the flow by the rapidly rotating rotor blades. The kinetic
energy of this swirl is removed by a row of stationary blades, resulting
in an increase in the gas pressure. This process is repeated through
                                       IT ALL STARTS WITH MECHANICS       59




several rotor and "stator" stages until the desired pressure increase has
been obtained.
    The "fan" stage of a modern aircraft engine is nothing but a second
axial-flow compressor driven by the main engine. The fan compresses
air to a high pressure, and then this air is blown out through a nozzle to
produce the thrusting force. When you visit an airport, look at the engines
carefully; the earlier engines had no fans, and the first fan engines ran
only a small amount of flow through the bypass fan. The newer engines,
such as those used on the Boeing 74':/ and DClO, have large fans that
pump about five times as much flow as is handled by the main engine,
and their fans are quite noticeable at the front end of the engines.
    Another device that is used for some lower-power applications is the
"radial-flow" or "centrifugal-flow" compressor. The flow enters near
the axis of rotation and is hurled outward by the rapidly spinning blades.
Work done by the blades therefore appears as kinetic energy in the moving
gas. The high-speed flow leaving the rotor is then slowed down by de-
celeration in a "diffuser," and this produ~es an increase in the gas
pressure. Centrifugal compressors are used for supercharging of piston
engines, blowing air into furnaces, and in automotive gas-turbine engines.
Compressor efficiencies compare the actual machines with hypothetical
devices in which all the energy input is put into a fully available form.
Efficiencies of 80% are typical for large multistage units, while smaller
machines used for blowing air have efficiencies closer to 50%.
    A centrifugal pump, such as used to circulate coolant in automobile
engines, works on the same idea. Liquid enters on the axis and is thrown
outward by the rotating blades; this is the process that increases the
energy of the liquid flow. The kinetic energy of the liquid is converted to
"flow energy" (a term we shall discuss in Chap. 4) by the deceleration
of the flow in the diffuser. This produces the high discharge pressure at the
pump outlet. The performance characteristics of a centrifugal pump or
comp:cessor depend on the blade design, and one typical example is
shown in Fig. 2.23. The highest discharge pressure for such a pump
occurs when the flow is shutoff and the impeller spins in stationary fluid.
As the discharge valve is opened to permit flow, the discharge pressure
drops, producing the typical pump characteristic curve shown in Fig.
2.24. The pump becomes ineffective at high flow rates, and hence there
is a flow at which the efficiency is a maximum. For large hydraulic units
the peak efficiency might be of the order of 80%, while for smaller units
capable of pumping a few hundred gallons per minute the efficiency
might only be about 50%.
60     ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN




                                                     Inlet guide vanes




FIG. 2.23   RADIAL FLOW COMPRESSOR CUTAWAY.




-~~
ll)L "'
o'::
        ii/\.
            ----------~
                          Ill!•
                             ~----------------i-
                                                 \
         Flow rate                Flovv rat,,.
FIG. 2.24   CHARACTERISTICS OF A CENTRIFUGAL PUMP.
                                            IT ALL STARTS WITH MECHANICS            61



PROBLEMS

Developing skill with numbers
2.1    A car with a 200-hp engine running and in gear but with clutch slipping
       pushes hard against a stationary wall. How much power is the car delivering
       to the wall?

2.2    The steel used in a cable has a yield stress of 200,000 lbf/in 2 • Safe practice
       might allow working stresses of half this magnitude; calculate the safe load
       that can be lifted with a cable having a diameter of! in.

2.3    The footings for a tower will be placed on earth that can support a com-
       pressive load of 2,000 lbf/ft 2 • Calculate the foundation area required if the
       tower weight is 80,000 !bf.

2.4    A hydraulic system can supply oil at a pressure of 400 lbf/in 2 • This is to be
       installed on a piece of farm equipment to operate hydraulic-load cylinders
       of 3 in diameter. Calculate the force that can be developed with each of
       these cylinders.

2.5    For the cable of Prob. 2.2, what will happen if the load is accelerated
       upward at 2g? What is the load that can be accelerated upward safely at 2g?

2.6    A man lifts a 150-lbf barbell up 2 ft. How much work (ft-lbf) did he do?
       Suppose he does this 20 times in l min; how much power does he expend
       in this exercise? When he lowers the weight, does he recover any energy
       useful for lifting weights? What happens to the energy he does recover?
       How does the energy he uses in 20 presses compare with the food energy he
       takes in in I day?

2. 7   A climber wants to develop a pneumatic device to shoot ropes uphill.
       Using air at 40 psia from a small pressure bottle, he wants to be able to
       shoot a 20-lbf weight up a height of 100 ft. He has built a simple piston
       launcher with a I-in-diameter piston that can travel in the launch tube a
       distance of 10 in. He plans to attach the weight to the piston, which itself
       weighs I lbf, pressurize the launcher, and then release the piston to hurl the
       weight and piston upward. Assuming that the full air pressure acts on the
       piston for the full 10-in distance, calculate the height that his device would
       toss the weight. !fit will work, how much excess capacity does it have? If
       it will not work, how should the design be changed so that it will?

2.8    Calculate the increase in potential energy of a 2,500-lbf automobile that has
       climbed from sea level to 5,000 ft. How did the car get this energy?

2.9    Assume that the car in Prob. 2.8 can coast back to sea level without friction
       or wind resistance, with no brakes; calculate the velocity that the car will
       have when it reaches sea level.
62     ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN




2.10    A 40,000-lbftruck descends from 4,500-ft elevation on a winding mountain
        road to 3, 700-ft elevation. Calculate the potential energy decrease of the
        truck, and explain what happens to this energy, assuming that the driver
        maintains a uniform speed.


Some more interesting analyses
2.11    Perform a series of experiments on yourself to determine your capabilities as
        an energy and power producer (lift weights, etc.). Estimate the amount of
        energy that you could produce in I day working at a reasonable level of
        effort, and the average power for the 8-hr work period. Estimate the
        power that you deliver over a shorter time period. Calculate your
        efficiency as a machine, taking your caloric intake as the energy-input
        term and your 8-hr outp~t as the energy-output term. Estimate the cost of
        your food energy, and calculate the ,cost of your 8-hr energy output on a
        cents/kwhr basis. Compare this with the going rate from electrical com-
        panies of about 2.5 centsfkwhr. Decide what you would ask to be paid to
        work like this for an 8-hr day, and then calculate the value of your energy
        output on a cents/kwhr basis. Est4mate the amount of energy you use or
        control in I day for lights, space heating, transportation (0.5 hp-hr/pas-
        senger-mile is a good figure for automobile transportation), etc. Calculate
        how many hours you would have to work to produce this much energy
        yourself; calculate how much you would charge for this energy at the cost
        for your labor determined above.
        Discuss the importance of energy in your life and how these calculations
        have affected your values in regard to energy.

2.12   It has been proposed that a low-level dam be built at the north end of
       San Francisco Bay in the Carquinez Strait. The dam would be used
       primarily for salt-water-intrusion control, and the lake behind the dam
       would provide recreational facilities for the area. The proposed dam would
       increase the water 1evel at the damsite by 15 ft, and power would be
       generated by dropping the river flow through hydraulic turbines to the bay
       below. The river-volume-flow rate is reported to be 30 million acre-feet
       per year. Calculate the power capability of this hydroelectric station, and
       the number of kwhr of energy that could be generated by this station each
       year. Would this handle the annual demand of the BART (Bay Area Rapid
       Transit) system of 320,000,000 kwhr/year?
       Familiarize yourself with the geography, demography, and ecology of
       the area, and discuss the values questions that relate to debate on this
       proposal.

2.13   It has been proposed that a tidal power station be built across the Golden
       Gate to San Francisco Bay. Large hydraulic turbines would generate power
       from the tidal flow in and out of the bay. The area of the bay is about
       l,200 square miles, and the difference between high and low tide is on
                                           IT ALL STARTS WITH MECHANICS         63



      average about 4 ft. Assuming that the same volume of flow will occur
      through the power station, and that the average drop of water will be
      lowered 2 ft·as it passes through the power station, calculate the maximum
      power that could possibly be developed with such an installation and the
      "actual" power, using an estimated efficiency of 30%. Compute the energy
      (kwhr) that could be developed in l year, and compare this with the
      requirements of the BART system (see Prob. 2.12).
      Discuss other technical and nontechnical questions that should be
      answered in the consideration of this proposal, and the way in which the
      values of the local society might aff~ct the final decision.

2.14 The use of electrical energy varies during the day by the order of 30 to 50%.
       Since there are no good ways to store large amounts of electrical energy,
       power plants adjust their output during the day to meet the demands of the
       moment. This means that many plants are operating at part load some of
       the time, and at part load the efficiency is almost always less than at full
       load. Moreover, the load patterns mean that the installed power capacity
       must be about twice as large as the maximum demand. For these reasons,
       utility companies are very interested in schemes that would permit them to
       generate electrical energy at a uniform power throughout the day, storing
       this energy somehow for use during periods of peak demand. Hydroelectric
      stations already are an important part of this system, for they can shut
      down completely during low-load periods, allowing the fossil-fuel power
      stations to keep running at near-peak efficiency. A scheme that is attracting
      current interest involves using the excess electrical energy produced during
      low-load periods to pump water to uphill reservoirs, and then to let this
      water run downhill through a hydroelectric power station to generate more
      power for the peak-load situations.
      To study this approach, consider a hybrid power station consisting of a
      400-Mw fossil-fuel power plant and a 100-Mw hydroelectric plant. Suppose
      that a 400-ft elevation difference exists between the two reservoirs of the
      hydroelectric station. Calculate the volume flow of water through the
      hydroelectric plant when it is generating its full capacity of 100 Mw (assume
      a generating efficiency of 70%). Assume that the combined system delivers
      full power for 8 hr, and operates at a uniform off-peak power for 16 hr each
      day. Then, calculate the power that is required to return this flow to the
      upper reservoir, assuming that the pumping efficiency is 60% (only 60% of
      the electrical energy input to the pump goes to moving the water uphill).
      What is the net power output from the combined plant when both units are
      generating power, and what is the net power output when water is being
      pumped uphill? Assuming that recreational uses of the reservoirs require
      that the water level not change by more than 2 ft over the day, calculate
      the acreage that must be allotted for each reservoir.
      Choose an area familiar to you where a system of this sort might be
      installed. Discuss the geographical, ecological, and demographic aspects of
      the area that would be important in the decision on whether or not to build
64     ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN




        this system there, and the private and public values that might come into
        conflict during debate on this question.

2.15    This problem deals with the energy requirements for a rapid-transit system.
        Choose a major city near you that does not at present have a rapid-transit
        system. On a map of the area, lay out a network of tracks and stations that
        would serve the main bedroom communities around the city, say for a
        radius of 30 miles from the heart of town. An initial system might have of
        the order of20 to 40 stations; so you can place these at strategic locations in
        the suburban and downtown areas. This initial rough plan will give you
        some feeling for the rail lengths of the transit system. Next, decide upon the
        approximate service frequency at each station, and the number of people
        that will commute along each line. This should provide you with enough
        information to estimate the number of trains your system will need; assume
        that the trains are independently powered and each can carry 80 passengers
        at a maximum speed of80 mph. For comparison, the BART system in the
        San Francisco Bay Area will use about 450 72-passenger vehicles.
        The first calculation involves the installed power capacity in each vehicle.
       The primary factors determining this power are the acceleration capability
       and the grade-climbing capability. Assunfe that your cars weigh 60,000 lbf
       each empty (the smaller BART cars weigh 56,000 !bf). You probably want
       to be able to climb a 3% grade at 80 mph (up 3 ft for each 100 ft traveled),
       and this requirement fixes the "grade-climbing power." As you leave a
       station, you want to be able to accelerate on level tract to 80 mph, and an
       acceleration of O. lg seems tolerable. This information will allow you to
       calculate the acceleration power. The motor for each vehicle should deliver
       enough power to accommodate the larger of these two requirements;
       aerodynamic power and rolling friction are smaller. For comparison, the
       BART cars have 600-hp capability in each vehicle.
       Next, estimate the maximum power that your system will demand. Some
       cars will be accelerating while others are cruising, so you aren't likely ever
       to call for the full 600 hp for every vehicle. Your estimated power is at best
       an educated guess at this point, but could be refined by very detailed
       analysis of the operation of the system.
       The previous calculation gave you an estimate for the maximum power that
       you would request from the electric company. You will normally operate at
       a lower power level; estimate your average power level, and then calculate
       the annual energy requirement of your system in kwhr. For comparison,
       the BART system will require around 320,000,000 kwhr/year.
       Individual commuting by automobiles requires about 0.5 hp-hr of energy
       per passenger-mile. Compare the energy cost of personal commuting with
       that of your rapid-transit system. Suppose that the electric company
       charges your transit company 2.4 cents/kwhr for electrical energy; what is
       the approximate energy cost on a cents-per-passenger-mile basis, and what
       will be the magnitude of the transit company's annual electrical bill?
       Discuss the economic, political, demographic, and ecologic factors that
                                           IT ALL STARTS WITH MECHANICS         65



       would be involved in the development of a rapid-transit system for this
       area, and the manner in which the values of individuals and the community
       would influence the decision on the construction of such a system.


Some research problems

2.16   "Hydroelectric power does not require or consume fuels; so in an under-
       developed country a little bit of hydroelectric power can have a large
       impact." Investigate the history of energy development in emerging
       countries, and write a critique of this statement.
2.17   Choose an underdeveloped country. Familiarize yourself with its geography,
       rainfall, and runoff patterns, and identify the likely locations for new
       hydroelectric power stations. Estimate the power that could be produced in
       these stations, and examine the impact of this new energy on the develop-
       ment of the country.
       Discuss the values of that society as they pertain to the development of
       additional electrical energy within the country, concentrating in particular
       on the differences between these values and those that you see operative in
       the United States.
2.18   Trace the development of hydroelectrical power in the United States, and
       write a critical analysis of the statement "the value system in the United
       States works against the development of hydroelectric power."
2.19 Read up on the controversy surrounding the Glen Canyon Dam project on
     the Colorado River. Identify the technical and nontechnical factors that
     influenced this debate and the various values that different groups felt were
     important in relation to the issue. Write a review of what happened and a
     critique of this from the background of your own values.
2.20 Trace the development of windmill technology, and write a short review of
     your studies. Be quantitative wherever possible. In what contemporary
     cultures is windpower still important?
                                                HEAT AND OTHER THINGS    71



scope of this book. Temperature is one of those things that you have to
work with for some time without really understanding it before you can
come to understand it. Mr. Fahrenheit really didn't understand temper-
ature as it is understood today, but he got on with his work by defining an
arbitrary scale of measurement that was good enough for the early days.        ".'t
The development of more scientific concepts and scales of temperature
follows the ideas laid out in the last chapter relating to force. Fahrenheit   'l      l
used his body to define 100°F (he had a slight fever) and a chilly day to
define 0°F. This corresponds to someone defining force in terms of a rusty
spring found in his back yard, with every inch of compression defining         '       .
the same change in force. A more rational one-point absolute-temperature
scale was adopted only as recently as 1954. On the absolute-temperature        I

scale the lowest possible temperature, at which molecular vibration            '\
ceases, is zero "degrees Kelvin" (denoted °K). Intervals along the scale
are set by defining the "triple point" of water (a peculiar condition where
ice, water, and steam exist together) as 273. l6°K. The Kelvin scale is the
one associated with the metric system (which the entire world will
eventually use). Engineers in some countries still make use of another
absolute temperature, the Rankine scale. A temperature in °R (" degrees
Rankine") is t of the same temperature in °K. Thus, the triple point of
water is at 491.69°R. The Celsius (formerly called "centigrade") and
Fahrenheit scales are shifted (nonabsolute) scales corresponding to the
Kelvin and Rankine scales, respectively. Fig. 3.4 relates these four




Ice point



                                                                .~.

Absolute
zero                OK            OR       "C          ~F



                      Absolute               Nonabsolute
                    temperature             temperature
                         scales                scales
                                                                                   t
              • Denote s the points used                                       I~ I
                to define the scale                                                Jt
                                                                                   ' .
FIG . 3.4   TEMPERATURE SCALES IN COMMON USE.
72   ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN




temperature scales, all of which you are likely to encounter as you read
articles about energy.
    To summarize, internal energy is the energy of atoms and molecules
associated with their chaotic microscopic motions. Heat is energy transfer
from a hot system to a cold one associated with chaotic collisions between
their molecules. Work is energy transfer between two systems associated
with orderly collisions between their molecules (remember the stately
parade). Temperature is a measure of how hot things are; hotter things
can transfer energy as heat to colder things. Now is the time to be sure
that the differences between these ideas are clear in your mind. ·


SOME SIMPLE ENERGY ANALYSES
    There is a special class of systems for which the energy analysis is
quite simple and straightforward. These are systems that always contain
the same matter so that there are no molecules going in or out to carry
energy in or out of the system. For a system of fixed matter, the only
possible ways to change the energy of the system (macroscopic analysi:or)
are ( 1) transfer of energy in or out as work, and (2) transfer of energy
in or out as heat. To add energy to the system, we can either squeeze it,
pull it, twist it, stir it, or shake it (thereby adding energy as work), or
we can heat it, say with a flame. To remove energy, we can let it expand,
or let it twist, or let it move against a force (thereby removing energy as
work), or we can cool it, perhaps with ice. These energy transfers will
result in a change in the energy stored within the system; the energy
balance connects all these energy terms through proper energy book-
keeping, which is usually rather simple for systems in this class.
    Often one can choose the system boundaries in a way to carve out such
a fixed-matter system from even the most complex device. Consider a
large central power station of the type shown in Fig. 1.1. The system
shown there is not in this class, because matter flows in and out at several
points. But inside such a system there is a closed-circulation-loop in which
the "working fluid" (usually H 2 0) flows around. This circulation loop
always contains the same matter, and hence is a fixed-matter system.
Figure 3.5 shows a schematic of this fixed-matter system. The water-
circulation loop consists of a pump that feeds liquid water into the boiler.
In the boiler the liquid water is converted to steam, which then flows
to the turbine. The flow leaves the turbine and enters the condenser,
in which it is condensed back to a liquid and returned to the pump for
recycling. Energy taken from the hot flames (or nuclear fuel) in the boiler
is transferred as heat to the steam in the boiler; energy is removed as work
output from the steam in the turbine, energy is removed as heat from the
                                                              HEAT AND OTHER THINGS   73


        Frorn
       flames
r-· .. . ...,._·---    ~·
                                                        ----- Fluid flows
     Boiler




FIG. 3.5     TYPICAL CLOSED-LOOP POWER SYSTEM.


steam in the condenser, and energy is put into the liquid water as work
by the pump. In Fig. 3.5 the pump is powered directly within the system
by the turbine, and thus W represents the net work that is available for
conversion to electrical energy in a generator outside the system.
   The energy balance for this system, expressed in terms of the energy                     I
flows defined in the figure , and taken over some prescribed time period, is
                                                                                           I
      Qb     = W            +   Qc +       !J.E&                                  (3.3)     ~i
                                                                                           i~
    energy             energy          increase in
    in                 out             energy storage


The system energy, here denoted by E., consists of the kinetic energy of the
rapidly rotating turbine disk, the kinetic energy of the high-speed steam
shooting out from the turbine nozzle, the potential energy of water, the
internal energy of the cold and hot steam, the internal energy of the
pipe walls, etc. Once the system has been warmed up and brought into
a steady operating condition (termed "steady state") these various terms
in E. become constant; the steam is always just as hot, the turbine disk
always goes the same speed, etc.; so there is no change in the energy-
storage term for steady-state operation. Therefore, !J.E& = 0, and the
energy balance simplifies to

     Qb = w                 +   QC                                                (3.4)
   energy             energy
   in                 out


Now we can clearly see where the energy put into the boiler is going;
part is emerging as useful work and the rest is removed as heat in the
condenser. (You may also see why engineers like to "assume steady state";
this gets rid of most of the hard part of the analysis!).                                  -''
,,
r,,_ _, - . ..
          -



                 74        ENERGY : FROM NATURE TO MAN




                    The "cycle-thermal efficiency" of this system, denoted by the Greek
                 symbol 1'/ ("eta"), is the ratio of the useful work output to the energy
                 input as heat,


                                                                                         (3.5)


                   Modern plants have cycle efficiencies of the order of 40%; high-technology
                   systems now on the drawing boards run as high as 50%- The overall plant
                    efficiency defined in Chap. l will be less than the cycle-thermal efficiency
                    because the boiler will take in more fuel energy than it manages to transfer
                     as heat to the steam and because the generator will convert only about
                     90% of the turbine work output to electrical energy.
                         The energy rejected from the system as heat Qc goes to the local en-
                     vironment, either to a river or to the air. This will warm up the environ-
                     ment, and is the much-discussed "thermal pollution." You know enough
                 ,f now to eshtimatebthe am~un t of ener~ th at is d( umped into the environ-
                 ~ ment eac year                  1       1
                                       y e ectnca generation p 1ants assume an average overa11
                 l· efficiency of about 30%) : you'll find it is more than three times the amount
                 \ of electrical energy generated, and this is why we really do have a thermal-
                  i pollution problem. Engineers are now working on ways to utilize the

                     power plant "waste heat" for other purposes, such as residential heating,
                     and this is one of the interesting problems that must receive attention in
                     the years ahead_
                         Another interesting example of a fixed-matter system is the "heat
                     pump," which is nothing more than a refrigeration system running in a
                     peculiar mode. The system is shown in Fig. 3.6. The compressor circulates
                     the "working fluid," an organic substance called "freon," and also in-
     ,~
                     creases the freon temperature during the process of compression. Energy
                     is then transferred as heat from the warmer freon to the relatively cooler


                                      1.. 41h To hoLJse
                      r- - - -,._.::- - 1
                      !
                      i    J
                           ·-·- t
                         Condenser
                   ! , y·ave
                   '      I
                      ! '-;y- , Comr.ires5or
                                                I--
                                                yt-A
                                                  i
                                                  I
                                                      I


                                                      :
                                                              I
                                                              !IV,
                                                              From mo~or
                      .1   .    ~. . to
                                ::v~pora   .r         I
                      I    :   r - - - - - - -.       1
                      I    4-· L--f-~                 I
                      L_ --    --~~ ~;,T~~~;~Joors
                      FIG. 3.6       HEAT PUMP FLOW DIAGRAM.
                                              HEAT AND OTHER THINGS       75

                                                                                ..
air in the house. This condenses the freon and makes the house warmer.
                                                                                 ,
                                                                                ' ;,

The liquid freon is then passed through a flow restriction (a valve) that
causes the pressure to drop. At this lower pressure some of the · freon
molecules escape from the liquid, forming gas bubbles and taking energy
from molecules that remain in the liquid. This dramatically lowers the
                                                                                ·.'l
liquid temperature. Now the freon is cold, so that when it goes through the
evaporator it can receive energy as heat from the outside air. This cools
off the environment, and so the heat pump in effect is refrigerating the
outdoors while it warms the indoors! You probably wonder why go to all
this trouble just to heat the house; why not use the electrical energy
directly in simple resistance heaters in the house? The answer is given by
the energy balance on the system, for which the steady-state condition
is (see Fig. 3.6)

                                                                        (3.6)
      energy       energy
      in           out


We see that the term Qh is larger than the compressor energy input W.
So we get more energy into the house than we buy from the electric
company! And the leverage can be remarkably high; if the temperature
outdoors is not too cold, say around 40°F, it is possible that Qe can be
as much as four times the compressor work, which means that the energy
we get into the house can be flue times the electrical energy that we
use!
   There is even an added bonus; with a little bit of extra plumbing we
can switch the system around to put the condenser outside and the

eTrato• IDfildel and        f11 m1 nlllDll m~ ~~~00 ~~ ~ml m[
outdoors. This gives us a way to cool the house in the summer!
   Heat pumps are truly marvels of engineering, and they should see
growing applications as our society strives to conserve its energy resources.
Figure 3. 7 shows a modern household heat pump.
   We hope the two previous examples aroused your cunos1ty about                   ~:
energy-conversion systems. Did you wonder why engineers are so un-               ·~
clever as to have to throw away 70% of the energy input to the steam-             rli
power system or why systems with 80% efficiency are not in operation               \
today? Or did you wonder just how much leverage one could get with the
heat pump, why not a factor of 5,000 over the electrical energy input?
It turns out that nature limits power-system efficiencies to numbers well
below 100%. There is an important physical law called the "second law           !\ ' ~
of thermodynamics," and an important concept, "entropy," that apply to
such systems. The second law sets a theoretical maximum for the cycle
efficiency that cannot be surpassed by even the most clever and sophisti-
cated engineer. We'll talk about entropy and the second law very shortly.
78   ENERGY : FROM NATURE TO MAN




            Outdoor            Indoor hea t   Indoor
            heat exchanger     exchanger      air fan




                      j

             Outdoor air fan               '
                                       Compressor         Controls
FIG. 3.7 GENERAL ELECTRIC HEAT PUMP. AS         SET UP FQR   LABORATORY
DEMONSTRATION AT STANFORD.




HEAT-TRANSFER MECHANISMS

   To help you develop a better understanding of heat, let's discuss the
process of energy transfer as heat in more detail. There are two important
mechanisms by which energy is exchanged as heat between interacting
systems. Temperature differences in solids, liquids, and gases produce a
flow of energy as heat by processes generally referred to as "conduction."
Temperature difference between objects also produces a flow of energy
across empty space by the process of "radiation"; radiation can also pass
through gases and liquids that are not too dense , such as the earth's
atmosphere or the flames in a combustion boiler. In a third process,
1-                                                                                 ~.
                                                                                   {:
                                                                                   ~

                                                                                   '
                                                                                       i




                                                 HEAT AND OTHER THINGS       77    d.,
                                                                                   '1           ~




  "convection," moving fluid* transports its internal energy from one
  region to another, where the energy is removed by conduction or radiation;
                                                                                       i.•
  sometimes convection is called a third mechanism for heat transfer, but
                                                                                       (1
  it is more precisely regarded as a combination of heat conduction and
  fluid transport of internal energy.
      Some microscopic models of heat-conduction processes will be helpful.
 We noted earlier that the atoms in solids vibrate frantically at high
  temperature but are more sedate at lower temperatures. Thus when
  temperature "gradients" (variations) exist in a solid, the excited molecules
  bang into the sluggish ones and speed them up, and as a result there is a        .i
 flow of energy in the direction oflower temperatures. In gases, the higher-                    'j
 temperature regions contain molecules moving rapidly compared with                '    ''      I

  the speeds of molecules in lower-temperature regions. The high-speed
 molecules fly over to areas of lower temperature, and some low-speed
 molecules fly the other way, but there is a net flow of energy from the
 higher-temperature regions to regions of lower temperature. The process
  of conduction in a liquid is somewhere between those in a solid and those
 in a gas.
      In order to give you a better feel for energy technology, it will be help-
 ful to review the basic mathematical formulations used to describe energy
 transfer as heat. This won't make you a heat-transfer engineer, but it
 may help you understand one! Let's first talk about conduction. The rate
 at which energy is transferred as heat by conduction (e.g., the calories per
 second) is proportional to the temperature gradient; if the temperature
 varies quite sharply over a short distance, there will be a high rate of
 energy transfer. The conduction heat-transfer rate is also proportional to
 the cross-sectional area that carries the energy flow-the larger the
 conducting area, the more the energy that flows through it. This behavior
                                                                                       r·
 is described by the "heat-conduction-rate equation," sometimes called                     ".   ~
                                                                                                I
 "Fourier's law,"                                                                      L,

                                                                          (3.7)

 We have written it here for the special case of conduction between two
 surfaces separated by a slab of material (Fig. 3.8) . T 1 and T 2 are the
 temperatures of the two surfaces, A is the cross-sectional area (area
 perpendicular to the direction of energy transfer), dis the distance between
 the two surfaces, k is a property of the conducting material called the
 "thermal conductivity," and Q is the rate of energy transfer as heat
 between the surfaces (e.g., Btu/hr or cal/sec) . (Throughout the book we
 • "Fluid" means gas or liquid.




                                                                                       ., · ~'
78   ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN



              d          I




                                    FIG. 3.8 TERMS IN THE
                                    CONDUCTION-RATE EQUATION.


use overdots to represent rates of flow.) Note that, for a given material
and temperatures, the rate of energy transfer as heat will be greatest
when the thickness dis smallest; this is why insulation is made thick and
frying pans are made thin. Since Q has the dimensions of power, the
thermal conductivity k will have a messy set of dimensions; you can
figure these out from Eq. (3.7) and check your result with Table 3.1.
The table shows that copper and aluminium are among the best con-
ductors of heat; for a given thickness and temperature difference, more •
energy will flow as heat through copper than through any other known
substance. Engineers take advantage of this whenever the conduction
process must be used to remove energy as heat quickly from a source;
for example, transistors are mounted in copper to provide for rapid
transfer of the energy as heat away from semiconductor material that
could be damaged by becoming too hot.
    Suppose we are interested in determining the rate of heat transfer
through the wall of a house. Note that the air spaces in the walls will
have a low thermal conductivity, and that the wood is a better conductor
(the nails are even better but don't provide much conduction area!). Wood
accounts for perhaps 10% of the conduction area in a typical frame wall,
so let's estimate that the average thermal conductivity of the wall will be

Table 3.1
Thermal Conductivities of Various
Materials

                  Thermal conductivity
Material          k, Btu/hr-ft-°F
Room air          0.014
Wood              0.06--0.08
Tap water         0.35
Brick             0.4
Steel             6-20
Aluminum          120
Copper            220
                                                                                ,,
                                                                                '··
                                                                                f''
                                                                                •'


                                              HEAT AND OTHER THINGS       79



about 0.02 Btu/hr-ft-°F. This might be quite close if the walls are stuffed
with some light fiber-glass insulatio11 to prevent convective motions of air
within the walls from contributing significantly to the energy transfer
through the wall. Now, walls are about !- ft thick, and we'll look at an
area of 1 ft 2 • Then, if the inside temperature is 70°F and the outside is
30°F, which correspond to 530°R and 490°R, respectively, Eq. (3.7) gives
                                    2
                           1 ft
   Q = 0.02 Btu/hr-ft- R x -
                        0
                              - x (530 - 490) R = 3.2 Btu/hr
                                                       0


                               0.25 ft

(Note that we could have used the temperatures in °F to compute the
temperature difference.) Thus, for each square foot of wall area there
would be a heat-transfer rate to the outside of 3.2 Btu/hr. At windows
the rate will be much higher and in fact will be determined by the con-
vective processes inside and outside rather than by conduction in the glass.
A good house designer will make calculations like these to estimate the
total rate of energy transfer as heat from the house to the outdoors on the
coldest day, and then be sure that the house heating system can supply
at least this much energy to the air inside the house to keep the house at a
steady, comfortable temperature.
    Convective heat transfer is described by an equation similar to Eq.
(3. 7),

                                                                       (3.8)

Here T 2 - T 1 is the appropriate temperature difference, It is the
"convection heat-transfer coefficient," and A is the area of the surface
exposed to the convection process (Fig. 3.9). The value of It depends on
the nature of the convecting flow. Faster flows tend to be quite turbulent
(see Fig. 3.9), and this markedly enhances the ability of the flow to·
pick up energy from the solid surfaces and convect it away. Slower flows        I '
                                                                                  ..
can be very smooth, or "laminar," and without turbulence the con-
vection heat-transfer coefficient will be much lower. Convective flows
can either be "forced" by a blower that makes the flow move, or arise
naturally ("natural" or "free" convection) as a result of the buoyancy
of warm fluid surrounded by cooler fluid.
    Values of It for different conditions are sometimes derived using com-
plicated mathematics and sometimes by experiments. A large body of
literature now exists on this subject, created almost entirely by basic
research in heat transfer carried out by engineers in universities, industry,
and government research centers. Pioneering work on heat transfer and
related fluid-flow problems continues to be a very important aspect of
graduate programs in mechanical, aeronautical, and chemical engineering
departments at our major universities.

                                                                                     ·;

                                                                                 ~l
                                                                                       '

                                                                                _.J
80   ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN




                    (a)




                   (b)




                   (c)
FIG. 3.9 (a) FOR CONVECTION
HEAT TRANSFER TO A FLUID
FLOWING IN A PIPE. T1 IS THE
AVERAGE FLUID TEMPERATURE. T2
THE WALL TEMPERATURE. AND A
THE SURFACE AREA INSIDE THE
PIPE. (b) AT LOW SPEEDS THE
FLUID MOVES SMOOTHLY THROUGH
THE PIPE IN ""LAMINAR'" FLOW.
(c) AT HIGHER SPEEDS THE FLOW
MOVES IRREGULARLY IN
''TURBULENT' FLOW.


    "Heat exchangers" are important components of many energy systems.
These are devices used to transfer energy as heat between two fluids.
There are many schemes, all involving surfaces (such as pipes) that
separate the two fluids. Energy is transferred by convection to the pipe
from the hotter fluid, then through the pipe by conduction, and then to the
colder fluid by convection. Often "fins" are added to the outside or inside
of the pipes to provide more surface area for the convection process; an
automobile radiator is an example of a "finned-tube heat exchanger."
The development of heat exchangers that are very small but have a high
energy-transfer capability is an example of "high energy-technology."
Such "compact heat exchangers" incorporate a lot of heat-transfer area
and are cleverly designed to produce high values of the convection heat-
transfer coefficient. Very novel, compact exchangers, in which the surfaces
are themselves moved between the hot and cold fluids, using ceramic
materials that survive at very high temperatures, are now used in vehicular
gas-turbine engines. Figure 3.10 shows some of the heat-exchanger surfaces
used in modern heat exchangers.
                                      Matrix




                                                                                                            :I:
                                                                                                            m
                                                                                                            ~
                                                                                                            )>
                                                                                            Plate-fin       z
                                                                                                            0

                                                                                                            ~
                                                                                                            :I:
                                                                                                            m
                                                                                                            ::0
                                                                                                            -t
                                                                            Tube -and - annulus             :I:
                                                                                                            z
                                                                                                            CJ
                                                                                                            Ul

                              FIG. 3.10         HEAT- EXCHANGER SURFACES.
                                                                                                            !!




J,.-. ...   -:......
                       -- -        ' -::= . SL-~ .:_i...
                                                                                                        •. - •
                                                                                                                   -
                                                                                                                  · -~
                                                                                                                         ~     :;::·_r-:-.
                                                                                                                         . ___,.,.r:.---.
r   82    ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN




        Nuclear power reactors consist of fuel plates or rod bundles in which
    the nuclear reaction releases energy. This energy is conducted to the out-
    side surface of the fuel elements, where it is transferred by convection to a
    fluid flowing past the fuel element (see Fig. 3.11 ). Various tricks such as
    flow swirlers and turbulence promotors have been used to increase the
    convection heat-transfer coefficient and thereby obtain a higher power
    output for given temperature difference.
       The basic physics and describing equations of radiation heat transfer
    are quite different from those for conduction or convection. Every surface
    emits radiation energy at a rate that is proportional to the fourth power
    of its absolute temperature. The rate of heat radiation from a surface is
    described by



         Q = eaAT 4                                                              (3.9)

    where A is the area of the radiating surface, T is its absolute temperature
     (°K or 0 R), <1 is the "Stefan-Boltzmann constant" = 1. 72 x w- 9
    Btu/hr-ft 2 - 0 R 4 , and e is a dimensionless property of the surface called tli'e
     "emissivity." Surfaces with e = 1 are called "black bodies"; they radiate
    the maximum amount of power for a given temperature. Oxidized metal
    surfaces have emissivities of the order of 0.6 to 0.9, while shiny surfaces
    have smaller emissivities, perhaps as low as 0.01. Heat can be removed
    from space vehicles only by radiation, and surfaces designed to do this
J   will be chosen to have a high emissitivity. In Thermos-type vacuum
    bottles one is instead interested in minimizing the amount of radiated
    energy, which is why shiny surfaces are used.
        Radiation can be thought of as the emission of photons (or light) at a
    variety of wavelengths; but not all radiation is visible. For example, the
    technique of infrared photography, which has been used to locate warm
    material in situations ranging from jungle warfare to power station
    thermal pollution, is based on nonvisible radiation. Heat radiation is
    just a form of electromagnetic radiation; other forms include television
    and radio transmissions. However, the radiation from a radio transmitter
    is organized (that is how it contains information), while heat radiation is
    disorganized; it contains no "signal," just "noise." This is because the
    photons are emitted randomly in random directions and with a broad
    band of energies.
        When radiation falls on a surface, some of it is reflected, some is
    absorbed, and some might be transmitted through the surface. Solid
    surfaces are quite opaque to radiation, and hence either reflect or absorb
    the incident energy. The radiation energy incident on the earth from the
    sun is partially absorbed by the atmosphere and partially reflected, and
                                                                    . - v-1
                                                                            1
                                                                       :'.' .1'·~:
                                                                            • .!




                Tubes
                fue l
                                                                            l,



                                                                            ,.




                                                                         ,. ,




                                                                            •.
                         Lo a ing handle




FIG. 3.11 NUCLEAR REACTOR FUEL ELEMENT. COURTESY OF THE   GENERAL
ELECTRIC COMPANY.



                                                               83      .'
                                                                        i   '
84    ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN




quite a lot gets through to the earth's surface. The solar radiation incident
upon the atmosphere is about 1.4 kw/square meter of surface area
perpendicular to the direction ofradiation; this gives you a figure which,
together with the diameter of the earth, you can use to calculate the
amount of solar power incident upon the earth as about 1. 7 x 10 1 7 watts.
   Two surfaces facing each other radiate energy toward one another and
will reflect and absorb each other's energy. The net energy exchange by
radiation between the two surfaces depends in a complicated way upon
the surface geometries, upon the absorption, reflection, and e;mission
characteristics of each, and upon the fourth powers of their two absolute
temperatures. The resulting heat-transfer-rate equation is of the form


                                                                        (3.10)

Here A is the area of either surface, F is a factor that includes the com-
plexities just described, and T 1 and T 2 are the absolute temperatures
of the two surfaces. If you recall your algebra, you can factor the temper-.
ature term and convert Eq. (3.10) to

                                                                        (3.11)

where the "radiation heat-transfer coefficient" A, is a complicated expres-
sion involving u, F, Tp and T 2 • When T 1 and T 2 are close to "room
temperature," A, will be of the order of I Btu/hr-ft 2 - 0 R for typical radia-
tion situations. You can use this number to estimate the radiant exchange
between your body and the environment. Your surface area is probably
of the order of 15 ft 2 (apologies for any insults!). Your skin temperature
is about 556°R (96°F) ; suppose that the surroundings are about
500°R (40°F), so that

     Q = 1 Btu/hr-ft 2 - R x 15 ft 2 x (556-500) R
                       0                          0




       = 840 Btu/hr

This of course presumes you are standing nude in the shade. Since the Ii,
for natural convention is also about 1 Btu/hr-ft 2 - 0 R, about the same
amount would be removed by natural convection, giving you a total
energy output as heat of about 1,600 Btu/hr. Your body wants to reject
only about 500 Btu/hr, and so you wear clothes to reduce the total heat-
transfer coefficient between your skin and the environment. You can
                                                    HEAT AND OTHER THINGS          85



calculate for yourself the outdoor temperature for which you would be
comfortable in the nude in the shade.*
    To summarize, the rate of energy transfer as heat between two systems
is determined by the mechanisms of heat transfer, by the geometry of the
system and the properties of the media involved, and by the magnitude
of the temperature difference. The larger the temperature difference, the
greater the heat-transfer rate.                                                         .1·1
                                                                                        ,· ~

AVAILABILITY, IRREVERSIBILITY, AND ENTROPY

    We are now ready to discuss the very basic ideas behind the answers
to questions about the "best possible" energy systems. Consider a system
containing a lot of energy at a high temperature. Suppose we inadvertently
or deliberately allow this system to interact with a system at room temper-
ature. Energy transfer as heat will take place by one or more of the pro-
cesses just described, and will result in the transfer of energy from the
warmer system to the cooler system. Something has been lost in the process,
but what? We have not lost any energy; the energy has just moved from
one place to another. But the hot energy could have been used to make
steam in a power plant, and the steam could have been used to make use-
ful work. We could have generated some badly needed electrical energy,
but we didn't. Now that the energy resides in a cold region we can't
make steam and therefore we can't make useful work. Not only can't we
use the cold energy to generate electricity, we can't even use it to melt
lead; by moving the energy from the higher-temperature system to the
lower-temperature one we "lost" some ability to use the energy con-
structively; we lost some possibility to do work! In scientific terms, the
"availability" of the energy has been reduced .
    Suppose that we decide we must return the energy to the hot system.
To do so will require a "heat pump" of the type described earlier in the                 i•
chapter. The heat pump will in turn require an input of work. So, we will
have to expend badly needed energy to repair the original loss in the
availability of the energy in the hot system. However, in so doing we must
use up available energy (work) to run the heat pump; i.e., we reduce the
available energy in the environment. Thus, overall we don't gain any                         '   I

available energy by trying to restore the original conditions in the hot
system; we are stuck with a permanent loss of available energy.
    Consider another system, this time a rapidly rotating flywheel im-                  I•       r
                                                                                        ' I
mersed in a tank of air. Initially there is a lot of energy in the speeding

*This calculation neglects evaporative cooling, which is important to human comfort.



                                                                                        •~ i
      86   ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN




      flywheel ; this energy could be used to generate electricity, to lift loads,
       or even to move a car. The friction with the air will gradually slow down
't'    the flywheel, and once it has come to rest, we will have lost all possibility
      of doing useful work with the flywheel kinetic energy. Again there has
       been no loss of energy; it has simply moved from the form of flywheel
       kinetic energy to internal energy in the air and steel. But there has been a
      loss of available energy, just as before.*
          There are many other processes that lead to loss of available energy,
       and you can think up examples of each. They include mixing of two fluids,
      spontaneous chemical reactions, all kinds of friction, electric curr~nt flow
      through resistors, and more (how about death?). These processes are
      called "irreversible" because they result in a permanent and irretrievable
      loss of available energy. Engineers call the amount of available energy
      loss the "irreversibility" of the process, and good engineers are usually
      on guard against unnecessary irreversibility. Some irreversibility is almost
      always necessary in real systems. For example, in order to make a lot of
      energy to flow as heat from flames to steam through a heat-transfer area
      of reasonable size, a large temperature difference is required (see Eq".
       (3.8)]; the dropping of energy from flame temperature to steam temper-
      ature is an irreversibility that must be accepted if one wants to have a
      boiler of finite size and cost. So the engineer is always faced with a
      compromise and must try to balance the disadvantages of irreversibility
      with other factors.
          Some processes have only a very small degree of irreversibility, and
      these are sometimes modeled as being "reversible." Figure 3.12 shows one
      such example. The spring-mass system can be set into oscillatory motion,
      and if the block is well lubricated, the friction can be reduced to the
      point where many cycles of oscillation will occur without noticeable
      reduction in the enthusiasm of the oscillatory motion. In the theoretical
      limit of zero friction the oscillatory motion will go on forever. There is 'no
      loss of available energy at any time during the oscillation, which is why
      the theoretical limiting process is reversible. Once each cycle the system re-
      turns exactly to the point where it was before, and thus whatever happened
      to the system during the cycle has been reversed . During the oscillation
      energy passes back and forth between the kinetic energy of the mass and
      the strain (internal) energy of the spring, but never (ideally) is there any


                                           FIG . 3.12 THE OSCILLATION WILL
                                           BECOME REVERSIBLE AS FRIC"AON
                                           VANISHES.

      •Some recent writers use the term "exergy" for available energy.•
-----------------~-~--




                                                     HEAT AND OTHER THINGS         87




    loss of available energy. The concept of the reversible process as a theoret-
     ical limit for some (but not all) real processes is very useful in the science of
     thermodynamics.
         In the flywheel discussed above, the initial state of affairs saw the
     molecules in the flywheel revolving around the axis in a stately parade;
     this is a very organized situation, and it is this molecular organization that
    makes the flywheel energy fully available. In the slow-down process
    the organized energy is gradually randomized until it all appears in the
    randomly oriented motions of individual steel and air molecules. The
    energy is no longer available to do useful work because the organization
    that we could use has disappeared. Randomization at the microscopic level
    always characterizes irreversibility.
        When the flywheel is rotating, we know that the molecules are moving
    around the axis in a particular direction. This knowledge allows us to
    capture their kinetic energy. When the wheel comes to rest, the molecules
    in the steel and air have taken on the original rotational energy of the
    wheel, but the molecules now move in all different directions at once. The
    lack of knowledge of what each molecule is doing at each instant prevents
    us from capturing their energy. Loss of information about the state of things
    at the microscopic level always characterizes irreversibility.
        These ideas about irreversibility, loss of available energy, and micro-
    scopic randomness and uncertainty about the microscopic state are ex-
    pressed quantitatively in terms of a property of matter called "entropy"
    (en-tro-pee). Entropy, like energy, is a conceptual quantity that one must
    come to understand by talking about it and working with it; any equations
    that are proposed to define it have to be fully consistent with the ideas
    about it. There are four basic aspects to the concept of entropy:
       1 All systems have entropy, which measures the disorganization at
         the microscopic level.
       2 The entropy of the whole is the sum of the entropy of the parts.
       3 The entropy of a perfectly ordered system will be zero.
       4 Entropy can be produced but can never be destroyed.
    The first expresses the ideas discussed above. The second tells us that the
    amount of entropy in a complex system must be the sum of the entropies
    of its parts. The third is important in considering matter at absolute zero
    temperature; pure substances at absolute zero are fully ordered, and hence
    must have zero entropy. The fourth is the famous (or infamous?) "second
    law of thermodynamics." Note that, while energy is neither produced nor
    destroyed, entropy can be produced, but it can never be destroyed. The
    second law of thermodynamics provides the mathematical structure with-
    in which engineers and scientists quantitatively deal with questions about
88    ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN




maximum efficiencies of power plants, minimum work requirements for
various processes, and the chemical composition of the products of a
chemical reaction.
   Various expressions for the entropy of matter appear in books and
papers on the subject. One famous one is

     S = k Inn                                                         (3.12)

 where k is a basic physical constant called "Boltzmann's constant,'.' n is
 the number of possible microscopic configurations of the system, and In n
denotes the "natural logarithm" of n. [Equation (3.12) is the sole in-
scription on Boltzmann's gravestone!] For a fully ordered system n = 1,
 and so S = 0 as required above. Systems with many possible microscopic
states will jump from one state to another, and the more possible states
 there are the bigger is S. And, if there are QA microscopic states possible in
system A, and !ls in system B, then in the combined system A + B there
must be QA X QB microscopic states possible. If you remember how
logarithms work, you will easily see that Eq. (3.12) gives SA+ B = •
SA + Ss as required above. Clearly Eq. (3.12) meets three of the four
requirements outlined above.
    Let's use an analogy to see how Eq. (3.12) relates to the "second law of
thermodynamics," as described above. Imagine that you have 100 red
jumping beans and 100 white; place the red ones on one side of a tray
and the white ones on another. There is only one way to do this (all red
on one side and all white on the other); son = I for this configuration
and hence S = 0 (recall In l = 0). Now let them jump. After a while the
red and white ones will be spread all over the tray, and the tray will look
"pink" rather than half-red and half-white. There are many ways you
could arrange the beans so that the tray looks pink. So n must be very
large, and hence S has gone from zero to some larger number; the entropy
has indeed increased !
    Equation (3.12) does fit all the requirements on entropy, but only for
systems in which each microscopic state is equally probable. If the various
microscopic states occur with different probabilities, theri scientists make
use of the expression

                                                                      (3.13)


Here P; is the "probability" (a concept we shall not discuss) of the ith
microscopic state and k is again Boltzmann's constant. In mathematics
                                             HEAT AND OTHER THINGS      89



the Greek letter 2 ("sigma") means "sum what follows over all values;"
so Eq. (3.13) means



If each of then states is equally likely, pi= l/Q and Eq. (3.13) reduces
to Eq. (3.12). Since probabilities are less than I, and logarithms of
numbers between 0 and I are negative, Sis positive, in spite of the minus
sign in Eq. (3.13).
    You may have run across Eq. (3.13) in some other areas. It has been
used to define "entropy" in many other situations, most notably in the
mathematical theory of information and communication. As social
scientists become more quantitative, they may begin to think in terms
of the "entropy of a given society" and perhaps even to measure this
entropy with a definition like Eq. (3.13). This general concept of entropy
is also a key factor in modern theories of decision making.
    Practical engineering analysis requires knowledge of the entropy of all
sorts of materials at all sorts of pressures and temperatures. While a good
physicist can use the microscopic definitions Eqs. (3.12) or (3.13) to com-
pute S for some simple cases, most of the entropy data have been generated
by an entirely different macroscopic approach. This was the original
approach to entropy introduced by the thermodynamicists of the nine-
teenth century, which is still used in most textbooks on thermodynamics.
They state that, for a reversible process, the change in the entropy of a
fixed-matter system is equal to the amount of energy that the system
receives as heat divided by its absolute temperature ( 0 R or °K). In terms
of the symbols in Fig. 3.13,


   l!.S = -Q    reversible process                                  (3.14)
          T

It is probably not at all obvious that Eq. (3.14) has any relationship to
the ideas about microscopic disorder discussed above, but the connection
can indeed be made. Q represents energy input as heat, which we can
think of as disorganized energy transfer (as opposed to work, an organized




                  FIG. 3.13 RELATING ENTROPY
                  CHANGE TO ENERGY TRANSFER
                  AS HEAT.
,..,.-.



          90    ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN




          transfer of energy). Doesn't it seem that disorder should flow into a
          system if we transfer energy into it in a disorganized manner? If we let
          some energy leak out (negative Q) through a disordered transfer process,
          doesn't it seem reasonable that disorder should flow out? Now, according
          to Eq. (3.14) the colder the system the greater the change in entropy for
          a given energy transfer Q. We can explain this microscopically by arguing
          that in very cold solids there is not much molecular excitation and there-
          fore adding a little bit of energy will stir things up quite a bit, adding
          lots of molecular disorder. At high temperatures things are already rather
          disordered, so that a few extra Btu do not add much entropy. The ·con-
          nections between Eqs. (3.12), (3.13), and (3.14) can be made much more
          rigorously; in fact, the Boltzmann constant kin Eqs. (3.12) and (3.13)
          is put there for the specific purpose of making these equations produce the
          same results as Eq. (3.14) in theoretical treatments of the entropy of ideal
          gases.
              We hope you have taken the time to figure out the dimensions of
          entropy from Eq. (3.14); energy/temperature. Common units for entropy
          are

               Calf°K, ergf°K, joule/°K, Btuf°R, ft-lbfj°R

              The big virtue of Eq. (3.14) is that it provides physical chemists with
          a means for measuring changes in entropy in the laboratory; one has only
          to measure the energy transfer as heat Q and the temperature T. The
          stickler is that the process must be reversible, for if it is not, the entropy
          change will not be equal to QI T. Since all processes are somewhat irre-
          versible, one has to work very hard to reduce the irreversibility to the
          point where Eq. (3.14) provides an adequate evaluation of ll.S. Fortunately
          this is possible, and the entropy of practically every material ev~r invented
          has been measured over wide ranges of conditions by diligent laboratory
          thermodynamicists and tabulated for use in engineering analysis.
              Armed with the second law and values for the entropy of all substances,
          the engineer can figure out what can and cannot be done with a system
          of interest. For example, he might want to compress air; the second law
          (together with the energy balance) gives him the tools to calculate the
          minimum work that is required for the process, and he can be sure that
          no earthly inventor will ever make a machine better than this theoretical
          ideal! The power of thermodynamic theory is very great, for one can find
          limits on what can be done without any reference to the details of partic-
          ular schemes !
              The "best" or "ideal" process is the one that is "reversible," i.e., it
          does not produce any entropy, i.e., it does not destroy availability, i.e.,
                                              HEAT AND OTHER THINGS      91


                                                                               l.'
it has zero irreversibilities. Frictionless motion is a reversible process;
reversible processes are ideals that might be approached very closely but
are never met.
   In carrying out available-energy analysis, engineers have developed
some other helpful ideas. Equation (3.14) can be interpreted as saying that,
whenever energy is transferred as heat across the boundaries of a system,
there is an associated "entropy flow." If the energy is put into the system
as heat, there is an entropy inflow; if the energy is put out as heat, there
is an entropy outflow. The amount of "entropy flow with heat" across
the system boundary is

              Qin
     sin                                                            (3.15a)
            Tboundary


or

              Qout                                                  (3.15b)
     Sout
            Tboundary                                                          ,I

                                                                               -~ 1

depending on the direction of energy transfer as heat. Equations (3.15)
describe the entropy flow for any process, reversible or irreversible.
(Don't forget that T represents the absolute temperature, R or °K.) For
                                                            0



a reversible process there is no entropy production within the system, and     ·•
so the system entropy change exactly balances the entropy flow, as
prescribed by Eq. (3.14).
   Equations (3.15) allows us to evaluate the amounts of "entropy flows
with heat." What about "entropy flows with work"? Work is, by concep-
tion, fully organized energy transfer, and hence one might correctly
guess that there is no entropy flow across a system boundary associated
with energy flow as work. Indeed, truly precise discrimination between
heat and work rests on the concept that entropy flows only with heat,
never with work. So, to fully comprehend the concepts of heat and work,        ,,
one really must simultaneously comprehend the concept of entropy!              '!
It takes years for persons working in thermodynamics to reach this deep
level of comprehension; so you should not be troubled if at this point
you have some uneasiness with these ideas.
   These ideas have one particularly important application with which
you should become familiar-the "Carnot efficiency." This is the effi-
ciency of a "Carnot engine," which provides an upper limit for the
performance of all real heat engines (such as that in Fig. 3.5). Figure
3.14 shows an engine taking in energy as heat Q1 from a region at temper-
ature T 1 , converting some of this energy to work W, and rejecting some
92    ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN




                                            FIG. 3.14 ANALYZING THE "BEST
                                            POSSIBLE" HEAT ENGINE.


energy Q2 to a region at temperature T 2 • Let's analyze the system en-
closed by dotted lines and make an entropy accounting. Entropy flows
into the system from region I in the amount


                                                                     (3.16a)
                                                                            •

and out to region 2 in the amount


                                                                     (3.16b)


There is no entropy flow associated with the work W. So the change in
the entropy of the system is given by bookkeeping as


     Msystem = Sin -   Sout   + Sproduced                             (3.17)

where sproduced represents the entropy produced by irreversible events inside
the engine. For steady-state operation of the engine, the amount of entropy
stored within the system does not change as time passes; so

     Msystem =   0                                                    (3.18)

Combining the equations above, we can rewrite Eq. (3.17) as


                                                                      (3.19)
                                               HEAT AND OTHER THINGS       93




So far, all we have done is entropy bookkeeping, Now we invoke the
second law of thermodynamics, which requires that the entropy produc-
tion can't possibly be negative. So


                                                                       (3.20)

or


                                                                       (3.21)


So, for a given heat input Q1 , the heat rejection Q2 must at least be as
large as Q1 ( T 2 /T1 ). We can relate Q2 to Q1 and the work W through an
energy balance on the system,

                                                                       (3.22)

So the engine thermal efficiency is


                                                                      (3.23)
                                                                                ..,
                                                                                ,j


We see that the second law gives us an expression for the maximum thermal
efficiency of heat engines, without any consideration of the makeup of the
engine! This maximum efficiency is called the "Carnot efficiency," after
the original inventor of entropy (who interestingly enough did not really
understand energy !) :


     'lcarnot   = l - T2                                              (3.24)


   Equation (3.24) suggests that, in order to obtain high efficiencies, one
wants to have low T 2 and high T 1 ; T 2 will be determined by the environ-
ment temperature, which at 60°F corresponds to T 2 = 460 + 60 =
520°R (don't forget that There is absolute temperature!). T 1 will be limited
by materials, and temperatures of 2000°R are not unr~alistic. For these
two temperatures                 ..~ <" !e~ .'    . ~ :t- ·'.'


     'learnot =   l -    520 = 0. 74
                        2,000
94     ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN




So 74% would be the maximum thermal efficiency of power plants
operating between these temperatures. Typically, a practical plant can
develop half this ideal efficiency; so it might have an actual efficiency of
37%.
    In order to come closer to the Carnot efficiency, engineers must some-
how reduce irreversibilities all through the system. Research in such
areas as the fluid mechanics, combustion, heat transfer, and lubrication
has led to slow but continual improvements in operating efficiencies.
Efficiencies will also improve as high-temperature metallurgy p~rmits
higher and higher temperatures to be employed in thermal power
systems.
    It would be well to outline what we expect from you at this point.
We hope that you understand that entropy is a measure of microscopic
disorder, of big old man's uncertainty about what all those little tiny
molecules are doing. You should know that the second law of thermo-
dynamics is a general law of nature that describes goings-on at the
microscopic level, where things naturally tend to get more and more
disorganized. Man's inability to control the actions of individual molecules •
makes it tough for him to utilize their energy fully. The natural irrevers-
ibilities of all real processes cause a loss of the availability of the energy.
You should be aware that a well-trained engineer can, by careful energy
and entropy bookkeeping, calculate the very best that can be done in any
process, and thereby set his sights and hopes accordingly. If you yourself
want to be able to work confidently with these ideas and procedures,
you'll have to take a comprehensive course in applied thermodynamics.

PROBLEMS

To develop skill with numbers
 3.1   A system receives 40 Btu of energy as heat and 75 Btu of energy as work.
       The initial internal energy was 139 Btu. Calculate the final internal energy.

3.2    A system receives 90 Btu of energy as heat while rejecting 140 Btu of energy
       as work. The initial internal energy was 720 Btu; calculate the final internal
       energy.
3.3    A flywheel spins in a pot of oil. The initial kinetic energy of the flywheel was
       10,000 ft-lbf, and the initial internal energy of the wheel and oil was 50 Btu.
       Calculate the final internal energy of the wheel and oil after equilibrium
       has been obtained.

3.4    For the heat pump of Fig. 3.6, Qe is 100,000 Btu each hour, and the motor
       draws 10 hp. Compute the energy input to the house each hour, in Btu and
       in kwhr.
                                                      HEAT AND OTHER THINGS          95



 3.5    A power plant produces 350 Mw of electrical energy from nuclear fuel with
        an overall plant efficiency of35%. Calculate the energy-transfer rate to the
        river-water coolant in Btu/hr. How many gallons of water would this
        power elevate 10°F in an hour?
 3.6    A substance melts at 500°R with an energy input as heat of 40 Btu/lbm.
        The process may be treated as reversible (you can freeze the liquid by
        removing the same amount of energy as heat) . Calculate the entropy change
        for the melting process.

 3. 7   Calculate the maximum possible cycle-thermal efficiency of a heat engine ·
        operating between cold, nonpolluting flames at 300°F and an environment
        at 60°F. What would you think of an inventor who claimed to have a
        magnetosterofluidozincal engine that could convert 45 % of the flame
        energy into useful work?

 3.8    Calculate the rate of heat conduction through a copper bar 1 in square and
        10 ft long if the end temperatures are 250°F and I 00°F.

 3.9    In a particular gas-cooled nuclear reactor the convection heat-transfer
        coefficient is 250 Btu/hr-ft 2 -°F, and the temperature difference between the
        fluid and solid is (on average) 400°F. Calculate the amount of surface area
        necessary to allow a total heat-transfer rate of 3 million Btu/hr.

3.10 A space vehicle must radiate 10,000 Btu/hr to free space. Assuming that
     the radiator surface is at 400°R, and that the surface emissivity is 0.8,
     calculate the radia tor area required, assuming the radiator is shaded from
     the sun.


Some more interesting analyses

3.11    Practical fossil-fuel power plants operate at about half the Carnot efficiency.
        Suppos_e that the air-pollution experts t_ell us that the combustion products
        from a 500°F burner are only one-third as dirty as those from a 1500°F
        burner per Btu of fuel energy. For a given electrical-power output, which
        burner temperature will result in the lower total production of pollutants?

3.12    It has been proposed that power plants be built to take energy as heat from
        warm water near the surface of the ocean (27°C) and reject energy as heat
        to the cold water deep below (l9°C) . What maximum efficiency could be
        obtained with such systems? How would you react to a proposal to spend
        40 billion dollars in development of a solar sea-energy program?
3.13    It has been proposed that natural-gas water heaters be banned for air-
        pollution reasons and, instead, that water in houses be heated with electrical
        energy generated at a distant power plant. The power station burns natural
        gas and produces electrical energy with 40% efficiency; the transmission
        line loses 10% of the electrical energy as heat. All that remains gets into the
        water. In contrast, the gas water heater gets only 60% of the fuel energy
96   ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN




      into the water. Which scheme uses more natural gas? Discuss the other
      factors that would be important in deciding whether or not to support a
      proposed law banning gas water heaters.
3.14 A new city is being planned for an undeveloped area. A 300-Mw nuclear
     power plant will be constructed near the city, and the engineers planned to
     use cooling towers to remove the "waste heat" from the power station. An
     environmentalist group has attacked this plan, and instead proposes to use
     the waste heat for space heating in the homes and offices in the city. The
     demand for electrical energy will be fairly uniform over the year at about
     4 million kwhr/day. The space-heating demands will vary from about
     25 X 10 9 Btu/day in the summer to about 300 X 109 Btu/day in the winter.
     An underground hot-water tank could be used to store excess "waste heat"
     to smooth out the space-heating demands for periods of a few days at most.
     Hot water generated at the power plant would be piped to the city for
     space heating; natural-gas water heaters at the power plant could provide
     additional heating of the water if the power-plant heat rejection is in-
     sufficient. The power-plant efficiency will be about 35 % if cooling towers are
     used, but only about 30% if the waste heat has to be rejected to the
     recirculating space-heating water system.
     Examine the energetics of this system, and critique the proposal for utilizing
     the waste heat for space heating. What additional arrangements will be
     necessary to provide for mismatch of the electrical and heating demands?
     Can you find a compromise scheme that might satisfy the values of both
     groups?
3.15 A proposed solar power system will collect energy radiated from the sun,
     use this energy to generate steam, and reject heat to the atmosphere through
     cooling towers. Using parabolic mirrors to focus the radiant energy on
     pipes; temperatures of l,000°F can be achieved. For locations in the
     southwestern United States the average energy that can be collected is about
     200 Btu/hr/square foot of earth surface area. The solar energy will be used
     to generate steam for a conventional power plant having an efficiency
     of 35%.
     A group opposed to nuclear power has been pressing the President to set"a
     national goal of developing solar energy along these lines in a massive way
     over the next decade. As a staff analyst in the Office of Technology
     Assessment, you have been asked to make a quick preliminary analysis and
     provide some basic input. Suppose that the new electrical-power capability
     the country will need to install in the next lO years is developed using the
     solar-energy scheme in question. How much land area will be required?
     If each plant has an installed capacity of 1,000 Mw, how many plants will
     be required, and what land area would be associated with each? How
     might the problem of nighttime power production be handled? (See
     Prob. 2.14.) What other technical and nontechnical factors should be
     considered in a more comprehensive analysis of the problem? (What
     problems might birds cause?)
FLOW SYSTEM
 ENERGETICS


      In which we glimpse
    applied thermodynamics
         doing its thing




THE WHYS AND WHATS OF WORKING FLUIDS

Many important systems use a "working fluid" to carry out various
energy-conversion functions. The steam power plant of Fig. 1.1 and the
heat pump of Fig. 3. 7 are examples of such systems. A first step in the
design of such a system is preliminary thermodynamic analysis in which
the engineer uses a combination of scientific principles, data about the
properties of the working fluid, and estimates of various component
performance parameters to predict the behavior of the system. This pro-
cess is called "thermodynamic analysis." It tells the engineer the temper-
atures and pressures that will occur in the system and the amount of
working fluid that must be circulated per hour to do the job at hand, and

                                                                       97
98   ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN




 it gives one the data needed for first-cut estimation of the size (and hence
 cost) of the various pumps, heat exchangers, compressors, turbines, piping,
etc., that make up the system. A basic understanding of this process will
 be helpful to you in reviewing new or proposed energy systems and will
facilitate your reading of the literature on energy systems; this chapter is
included with this objective in mind.*
     Why use a fluid at all? This is a good question, and there is a great
deal of interest today in "direct-energy-conversion" systems that can
convert energy from one form to another without use of an intermediate
working fluid and the pumps, heat exchangers, compressors, turbines,
etc., that fluid systems employ. For example, solar cells used on space
vehicles are direct-energy-conversion systems; their light weight makes
them well suited for space application, but their low power output and
poor efficiency makes them losers on earth in comparison with conven-
tional energy-conversion systems. Research in materials science and tech-
nology may someday bring direct-energy-conversion systems up to the
performance levels of fluid systems, but fluid systems will always remain a
large and important factor in energy technology. So, to know abouto
energy technology, we must know about the energetics of fluid systems.
     To know about fluid systems, we must know something about fluids.
You are probably familiar with a few, such as air, water, steam, milk,
kerosene, and beer, but these are only some of the important fluids in
energy technology. Man-made organic fluids called freons are very
important in refrigeration systems. Liquid metals such as sodium, potas-
sium, a mixture of the two called NAK, and cesium are very important
in high-temperature energy technology. Each fluid has its own peculiar
characteristics that make it well-suited for a particular job, and each
has its problems that the engineer must work around. For example,
some freons are quite poisonous, and the liquid metals are highly corrosive
at high temperatures. Even air and water have their problems.
     In selecting the fluid for a particular application, attention is often
paid to the boiling properties of the liquid. You probably know that water
boils at 212°F, but did you know that this is true only if the pressure of
air or steam around the water is one atmosphere (14.7 psia)? Ifwe want
to boil water at a lower temperature, say 80°F, the pressure would have
to be reduced to about 0.25 psia. At this low pressure a pound of steam
takes up almost fifty times as much space as 212°F steam, which means
that large pipes will be required to carry the steam. And, if a joint in the

*You can probably understand most of the examples in Chap. 5 of W. C. Reynolds,
"Thermodynamics," McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York, 1968, if you want to see ..,
some additional analysis. Also see Chap. 9 of W. C. Reynolds and H. C. Perkins,
"Engineering Thermodynamics," McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York, 1970.
                                            FLOW SYSTEM ENERGETICS      99



piping leaks the slightest amount, air will be sucked in, destroying the
desired low pressure. So, special provisions for removing the air will have
to be provided if we elect to use water. Water has other problems at high
temperatures. For example, if we want to boil water at 700°F, we will
have to do it at a pressure of almost 3,100 psia! So, for a low-temperature
application we would probably choose a fluid that had reasonable boiling
pressures at low temperatures, and for a high-temperature application
we'd select a fluid with tolerable pressures at high temperatures. This is
why freons and ammonia are used in refrigeration systems and things
like mercury, cesium, and rubidium are of interest for very high temper-
ature power systems. Figure 4.1 shows the boiling temperatures of several


                                                          3
                                                          ~
                                                          ~_J
                                                            I
                                                            I




                          Temperature, °F
FIG. 4.1   BOILING POINTS OF SELECTED LIQUIDS.
 [1
 !I
 I·
 I.    100    ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN




         t
1
 i.
       J ~//'cp I£
         I
         I
             G.,
                      B,
               ,,/' · A                  D
         I(        uq,id
         ~----·---------·~
                 p
                                                 FIG. 4.2TYPICAL T-P DIAGRAM
                                                 FOR A FLUID.


        fluids as functions of the pressure. If you have a scientific bent, check out
        the "Handbook of Chemistry and Physics" from your library and look
        up the boiling temperatures of different fluids at different pressures (often
        called the "vapor pressure").
i'          Consider one of the lines on the temperature-pressure diagrams, as
       shown in Fig. 4.2. Points below the boiling line correspond to liquid state~
I.     and points above to "vapor" or "gas" states. The lines thus mark the
       boundary between liquid and gas, i.e., the unique combinations of temper-
       ature and pressure for which it is possible to have liquid and gas co-
'' '   existing together. For example, in Fig. 4.2 the point A is a liquid state.
       By heating the liquid at fixed pressure, we can increase its temperature
       to point B, where boiling will occur. After all the liquid has been con-
       verted to vapor, by further boiling the "state point" will move from B to
       C; points on the line BC are gas states, and point Bis the only point where,
       at the fixed pressure, liquid and gas will exist together in equilibrium.
           The right end of the boiling line terminates at the "critical point,"
       "CP" in Fig. 4.2. This is the highest pressure at which a liquid-gas
       mixture can coexist. At pressures above the critical pressure the liquid still
       changes to a gas as it is heated, but not by the abrupt transition that
       characterizes boiling. Instead the liquid just gradually becomes thinner
       and thinner, and eventually disappears. This process is shown by line
       DE in Fig. 4.2, and is sometimes referred to as "supercritical vaporization."
           The left end of the liquid-gas transition line terminates at the "triple
       point," "TP" in Fig. 4.2. Lines across which solid-liquid "phase tran-
       sitions" occur (called melting or freezing) and solid-gas phase transitions
       (called sublimation and snowing) emanate from the triple point, as shown
       in Fig. 4.3. The triple point is the only point where solid, liquid, and gas
       can coexist together, and for a given fluid this occurs at a unique temper-
       ature and pressure. As noted previously, the triple point of water is used
       to define the absolute temperature scale.
                                             FLOW SYSTEM ENERGETICS      101




FIG. 4.3   PHASE DIAGRAM AND PHASE TRANSITIONS.



    You may feel that we are getting rather technical at this point. If you
are beginning to feel slightly lost, remember our objective in including
this chapter-to give you just a little insight into what goes on in the
minds of engineers as they are inventing and designing power systems.
Struggle along and try to build as much of this insight as you can-we
don't expect you to become an instant expert engineer!
    In order to design a system to do a particular energy-transformation
task, an engineer must have information about the "mass density" of the
working fluid, usually denoted by the Greek symbol p ("rho"). It is a
convenient fact of nature that the density of a fluid depends upon only
the temperature and pressure, and hence at each point on Fig. 4.3 there
is a unique value of the mass density in each phase (discontinuities occur
at the lines). The density does not vary much in the liquid or solid regions;
so often single numbers for each of these regions will suffice. However,
the density of a gas increases markedly with increased pressure (the
molecules are pushed together) and decreases with increased temperature
(the molecules want to fly apart), and so charts, tables, or equations
relating the gas density to temperature and pressure are always required.
The charts take the form of property maps, with lines of constant density
appearing as contours. Figure 4.4 shows the property map for air. For
gases an algebraic equation relating the density to pressure and temper-
ature is often used, called the "ideal gas equation" or the "perfect gas
equation"

           p
   p                                                                    (4.l)
           RT

where P is the absolute pressure, T is the absolute temperature, and R
is a constant that varies from gas to gas. Some values for R are given in
102       ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN




      1400
                                                                           //
                                                                      /'
                                                                  _/-/'
                                                             ......
                                                       ./r
Q'.                                              .'/
                                                                                    ,f
                                                                                        ,/'·:·    --; 600 l.J....
                                                                                                        .    b
~.1000                                                                          (/,.·




                                                                                                  -iO
                                                                                                 __ j
                                                 200                                             300
                                       P, psia
FIG. 4.4 SPECIFIC VOLUME OF AIR; THE SPECIFIC VOLUME v IS THE RECIP-
ROCAL OF THE DENSITY.


Table 4.l. Equation (4.l) is a good approximation at points well away
from the critical point, and is best at low pressures and high temperatures.
For example, the density of air at 100°F (560°R) and 2 atmospheres
(30 psia) is, from Eq. (4.1),


      p
               30 lbf/in 2 x 144 in 2 /ft 2 = 0 _145 lbm/ft 3
             53.3 ft-lbf/lbm- 0 R X 560°R


Table 4.1
Selected Gas Constants

Gas                     R, ft-lbf/lbm- 0 R
Hydrogen                767
Helium                  386
Methane                  96.4
Air                      53.3
Carbon dioxide           35.I
                                            FLOW SYSTEM ENERGETICS       103



Most charts, including Fig. 4.4, give the "specific volume" (the volume
per unit of mass), which is the reciprocal of the density,

       I
   v = -
       p

The specific volume for air at the conditions given is


   V=-----                6.90 ft 3/Ihm
        0.}45lbm/ft3

Thus, at 100°F and 30 psia each Ihm of air takes up a volume of 6.90 ft 3.
    Flow system engineering requires data for the internal energy and entropy
of the fluid. Physical chemists have determined the energy and entropy
of just about every substance imaginable for practically all temperatures
and pressures of interest. These are expressed in terms of the "specific
internal energy" (the internal energy per unit of mass) and the "specific
entropy" (the entropy per unit of mass), which are usually denoted by
lowercase symbols u and s, respectively,


   u = -
        u                                                             (4.2a)
       M


   s = -
        s                                                             (4.2b)
       M

The dimensions of u are thus energy/mass, and hence u values are given
in either Btu/lbm or perhaps cal/gram. And, the units of the spe~ific
entropy swill be either Btu/lbm- 0 R or cal/gram-°K. The specific internal
energy and entropy depend upon the temperature and pressure, and so
contours of constant u and s can be drawn to go with the contours of
constant p. Figures 4.5 and 4.6 give examples. Then, one giant map can
be drawn with all this information on it (Fig. 4.7), which can get very
confusing if you don't know what's up. Good roadmaps use several colors
to help tell the lines apart; engin~ers seldom have the luxury of good
colored property maps and usually riust work from a mess like Fig. 4. 7,
perhaps enlarged but with even more information on it.
   If you are struggling to get some feeling for what this chapter is all
about, you may already have made it very much worth your while. In
addition to providing data on the fluid, property graphs are very helpful
in explaining how a proposed energy system will work. As you read
              ;\""•·-..   ••• ':'; .~~;;:.,.-..• .-,-
                                                                                         220
                                                        ..,..-.-.•!•,.;:.Ot•,.,·...,;., ,.-,w~;,· f;<O'~,-<<' !) '.....~,'';.,,_;.'":"'•~~.~,.....,....°'"ON•-~_f>-,;,r..~-~ ·.-.•.•.-• -;..,..,..-""/tt< '-'W~Oo(· "~..."""'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -' 800
       1200;_                                                                            200
              ~...... :J~•'"'-..'"",•w_,.,..~n.~,.to><..-,- ;::<:;w.~...-..,.•.:1<•>."''>'."~"_,,.,.._..,~.•,,;_.,..,,_,.,._,,., .,..... ~l<O,\>~.";.•"'",;~~-'{.....~.:,:f,A..;..,:~,;~,WU;.,..,...~;}
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        !


              l                                                                            1~                                                                                                                                      ~ 400
       8t)J                        ..
              ~-/"~-- ·-w--. •;,.,.,;,..,'.-'-f-.~.-.-"""!'                                ....>ml• ... ~\o:ll.:.,,..,...,,-.,,,.u,;.:"'-:'..>}::;<."S•.,1'•liot'l;<o«(."'fi<"'~~;1'1,.,.,,,.~t'1.~~'~!t;:\il,..,,.·.,.c< 1 J



              r.
              : .,.,,._,=•"'•---•"""'""'"''"'"'':;....                                      120
                                                                           ~,.":~_,.,,~·•<:..:..-..•~,_;,-..->.....~J!'(;C'_.... .. ,,f\<::'>''":'.TT•..~0:,..,,.,~~(0-~'"""""'""°''"'"'.,-•w '"   ....' .,...-"w"...... ,......_=i•_. , ~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ZO)
              I                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ,

       600 f""'''·---"'""'"'"'''·'""'"' "'"""~2:~?..,.""·'·'·'""'"""~""~-~"'~~,-"."'~~. "-"•·~~~-'
              I
              \
              \~"' >:--
                                                                                                  80
                            .....~o:"~'''""" ..-"',. .,.,...,,,.:,,·... .-r-':'.r....-~-.,......,,.~~,,.,.~•.• .. .,fJ',.,.,_,....,.~..,tr.i.., ,r,..........."lD!>.._,.,.,,,'l',,.., 1 ""'," ,f•,._;'<-,.;.-:, ~·. ': ..-,,,~":'::"; J
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         '
       40C LJ _ --                                                                        J ------ - -·• .----<- ·-· - - - , .t. ____ -- ---------
            1 atrn                                                                    100                                                               200                                                                    300
                                                                                                      P, psia
FIG. 4.5             INTERNAL ENERGY OF AIR (RELATIVE TO 1 ATM . 0° R).

       1600 ;--


       1400 ~-


       1200 !-


IX'.
0
i-'




                                                                                                                          P, psia
 FIG. 4.6             ENTROPY OF AIR (RELATIVE TO 1 ATM. 400°R) .

104
                                              FLOW SYSTEM ENERGETICS       105




                                                                                  J
                                                                                  !f




FIG. 4 .7 THERMODYNAMIC PROPERTIES OF AIR (IDEAL-GAS MODEL). s. Btu/
lbm- 0 R ABOVE REFERENCE OF 1 ATM . 400°R. u. Btu/lbm ABOVE REFERENCE OF
1 ATM . 0° R. v. ft3/lbm.


articles on new energy-conversion systems, you will encounter "process
representations" on a variety of "thermodynamic planes," the term
engineers use to describe their vast assortment of property maps. Now
at least you should have some idea of what these are all about. Quite
often the temperature-entropy ( T-s) plane is used; this is a map with tempera-
ture as latitude and entropy as longitude, with lines of constant everything
else drawn all over the place. Figure 4.8 shows the T-s diagram for water.
Most of the lines have been removed so that you can see some white
space between. An engineer would want a large graph with many more
lines to do accurate calculations, and then would use a small map with
just a few key lines to explain how this device works.
   Figure 4.9 is a less cluttered T-s plane, showing only one line of
constant pressure, labeled with a circle-P. We will use such circles to
denote properties constant along lines. The bell-shaped curve is called the
"vapor dome"; states inside this curve correspond to mixtures of liquid
and gas (vapor); to the left of the dome is liquid and to the right is
gas. The left-hand side of the dome, containing point B, is called the
~ ------- - ---------------=====================




          106   ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN




                       h, Bt u/ lbm
                       P, p5ia
                       v, f t '/ lbm




                                       Entropy , Btu/! bni - 0 R

           FIG. 4.8   TEMPER ATURE-ENTROPY DIAGRAM FOR WATER.


          "saturated-liquid line," and the right-hand side containing point B is the
          "saturated-vapor line." The top of the hill is the critical point. The solid
          states and the triple point are not shown. Note that the saturated-liquid
          line and the satura ted-vapor line coincide on the T-P plane (Fig. 4.2). On
          the T-P diagram (Fig. 4.2), the vapor dome appears as the line between
          the triple point and the critical point, just as the face of a cliff appears
          as a line when the cliff is viewed from the side.
             Suppose we imagine an experiment in which we heat a fluid in a
          balloon that permits the fluid to expand as necessary to hold the pressure
                                                                           FLOW SYSTEM ENERGETICS   107



                                                                  ( jj',
                Supercritical region
                                                            ,,i'"
                                                                 /r-j
                                                         ,l
        satudra ted             /
        1tqut , 1tne  _,...-~~'----- Critical point
              \      / ,,x .,,_

T       Subcooled
                 _,,_/
                 ~7
                   '' -, , / /
                                                 \ ye
                                            \Saturated fp\
                                                vapor
                                              \ l"
                                                    \
                                                      ,
                                                        _')!:.../
                                                                   ;e/
        liquid    I           \~ ,- - C
        regio~                 \ / Superheated vapor
             8 --- --_ - -- -      region (gas)         B'\
                             L1qu1d +gas                      -
                  A -         mixture
    ~---- ---- --- -   --- -------------- ---- ----------------------->-
                                  s
FIG. 4.9      T-s CHART FORM,



constant. We'll start at point A on Fig. 4.9, a liquid state. As we transfer
energy as heat to the fluid, the temperature will of course increase.
According to Eq. (3.14), the entropy will also increase. When we reach
point B the liquid starts to boil; we will have to add more energy as heat
to the fluid to evaporate the liquid completely, and again according to
Eq. (3.14) the entropy of the liquid-gas mixture will increase. However,
the temperature will not change as we boil off the liquid; but the mass
fraction of liquid present (called the "moisture" of the mixture) will
gradually go from 100 to 0% as we continue the boiling process. Equiv-
alently, the mass fraction of vapor present (called the "quality" of the
mixture) will go from 0 to 100%. At point B' we have evaporated all the
liquid; continued heating will just warm up the gas to point C, with
                                                                                                          '
                                                                                                          ~.
another entropy increase associated with the heating process. Alternatively,
we could start at point C and cool the gas. This would drop the temper-
ature and entropy (remember that heat removal reduces the entropy!).
At point B' the liquid would start to condense, and droplets would form
in the mixture. As we cool the mixture, its state would gradually change
from the saturated-vapor state B' to the saturated-liquid state B~ where
all the fluid is liquid. Further cooling of the liquid would lower the
temperature and entropy of the liquid back to state A. Understanding
these hypothetical experiments will help you to understand the workings
of energy systems, so go over this paragraph a couple of times if the ideas
are not yet clear.
   A little familiarity with some extra jargon will help you in reading
about energy systems. If you looked closely at Fig. 4.8, you may have
noticed lines of constant h. This is a property of the fluids called the
108    ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN




"enthalpy" (en-thal-pee, not to be confused with en-tro-pee). The
enthalpy h is defined as

     h = u + Pv                                                               (4.3)

and is simply the sum of the specific internal energy and the pressure-
specific volume product. (You will note that the dimensions of Pv are the
same as those of u; so are the units if one takes care to convert things like
ft-lbfto Btu.) It happens that the combination u + Pv appears qver and
over again in the energy analysis of flow systems, and so engineers have
gotten the physical chemists to include lines of constant h on the various
thermodynamic planes. We'll see how the enthalpy arises shortly.
   Another thermodynamic plane that is used mainly for analysis of
refrigeration and other low-temperature systems is the pressure-enthalpy
plane. Figure 4.10 shows a simplified P-h diagram, including a line of
constant temperature. Note the locations of the liquid, gas, and mixed-
phase regions. Figure 4.11 shows a more detailed P-h chart for freon-12,
a common fluid used in household refrigerators. Note that portions of the
constant T, s, and v lines are not shown. Still another useful plane is the
enthalpy-entropy plane (h-s), shown schematically in Fig. 4.12. Again
the circle-P and circle-Tare used to denote the lines of constant P and T.
A more detailed h-s diagram for water, as might be used by an engineer
in the design of a modern steam power system, is shown in Fig. 4.13. The
h-s plane is especially useful in describing systems, because h relates to
the flow energy per unit mass, and sis the entropy per unit mass. Thus,
vertical (h) distances relate to flow energy changes, and horizontal (s)
distances relate to flow entropy changes. The h-s diagram is called a
"Mollier diagram" in honor of an early engineer.




,P




                                 - -~----···-·---···--   ...   ·---- .   -~


                        h
FIG. 4.10   P-h CHART FORM.
                                                                            FLOW SYSTEM ENERGETICS                                      109




                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                            '""""';-1-1+-.,..........-l-i-'I~

                                                                                     -'+,.....fht-r-ii'<+-t_,.,,-tt~·"'1 ~ ~

                                                                                                                                ....I
                                                                                  ~A--'l.-++-".,.._++''<-1-+""'"__,~o ~
                                                                                                                        ' '2 11
                                                                                                                                F"'
                                              "-i-;."""-;-'"-~)-...,-i+--"iot--t>.o+~~+""di---'!lo<-H§ ~
                                                                                                                                ....
                                                                                                                                 f
                                                                                     't'--t-"'!--t;""'d---+-l-"1.1 0             ::>
                                                                                         "<t--T'"<t'-~..-'lri~·µ· ::: j




                                                                                                                                         u
                                                                                                                                         ~
                                                                                                                                         <t:
                                                                                                                                        z
                                                                                                                                        >-
                                                                                                                                        0
                                                                                                                                        0.
                                                                                                                                        ~
                                                                                                                                        a:
                                                                                                                                        w
                                                                                                                                        I
                                                                                                                                        I-


    00 O      0     o   0 0 OOO     O   O     O      QOOOO O                0      'V OCO WLnV M           N
    0 0 0     0     0   00 00 0     0   0     "'1"   0 co (0 U) '<:t C"')   (\I
    0 0 0     0     V   OCO WW1 ~   M   C\J   ..-    .,...
    In~("')   C\l




    We hope that you are not overwhelmed by the complexity of this
fluid-property information; some appreciation for what it is and how it is
used will be helpful to you in understanding an engineer's explanation
of an energy system, and this can help you ask the right questions when the
time comes for a public debate on the system. If you are feeling brave,
110   ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN




h




                          s
FIG. 4.12   h-s CHART FORM.


check out the "Handbook of Refrigeration Engineering," or look in the
"International Critical Tables," or in the back of books on applieq
thermodynamics* to see the myriad of property charts that are available.
The charts are nothing but plots of numbers, and the numbers are usually
available in tables.t So, often an engineer will take his data from a table
rather than from a graph.
   Approximate algebraic equations that relate the internal energy and
enthalpy changes to temperature changes are often useful. In general the
specific internal energy can be changed by changing either the temper-
ature or density of the fluid; but if the density is not changed by the
process, then only temperature changes will produce internal energy
changes. In this case, the internal energy change can be written as

                       (for constant v)                                    (4.4)

where the coefficient cv is called, for historical reasons, the "specific heat
at constant volume," an unfortunate name because "heat" does not
appear anywhere in Eq. (4.4). If one wants to be fussy, Eq. (4.4) really
holds only for small temperature differences, but one can often use
Eq. (4.4) for a single phase even when the temperature change is a
hundred degrees or more. Although we suggested that Eq. (4.4) holds

*See W. C. Reynolds, "Thermodynamics," McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York,
1968, or W. C. Reynolds and H. C. Perkins, "Engineering Thermodynamics," McGraw-
Hill Book Company, New York, 1970, for example.

t See, for example, Keenan, Keyes, Hill, and Moore, "Steam Tables," John Wiley &
Sons, Inc., New York, 1969, the steam power plant designer's bible!
                                                                            FLOW SYSTEM ENERGETICS      111




                                                                    1.6      1.7           2.0   2.1     2.2




                                                                                                               ·I

                                                                                                                l: i
                                                                                                                ·~




Critical                                                                                                       'l
5tate




     800 IU-4"'"'"'-..ut..r_,r.,,~~'Jl.;!"L..l<h"-.O--=-c'""""'u..<..L>./
        1.0      1.1        1.2       1.3       1.4       1. 5      1.6
                             Entropy, Btu/lbm-•R
                                                                                                               ! .
FIG. 4.13        MOLLIER DIAGRAM FOR STEAM.


only for a constant-volume process, for gases u is almost totally indepen-
dent of the fluid density (except near the critical point), and so for gases
Eq. (4.4) can be a good approximation for any process. Similarly, the
enthalpy property depends on both temperature and pressure; but for a
constant-pressure process we can write

                                  (for constant p)                                                     (4.5)




                                                                                                                '
112     ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN




where the coefficient cP is called the "specific heat at constant pressure."
Equation (4.5) holds for gases even if the pressure does change (except
near the critical point). The specific heats cv and cP are properties of the
fluid that depend upon the fluid state (temperature, pressure, and phase).
One can often get away with assuming that cv and cP are both "constants
of the fluid," for neither depends strongly on pressure and both increase
only slowly with increasing temperature. Typical values are given in
Table 4.2.

Table 4.2
Specific Heats of Selected Fluids at Moderate Temperatures

                      Cv, Btu/lbm- 0 R    Cp, Btu/lbm- 0 R

Water*                1                   1
Watert                0.336               0.446
Freon-12*             0.22                0.22
Light oil*            0.5                 0.5
Mercury*              0.035               0.035
Airt                  0.171               0.24
Heliumt               0.75                1.25
Hydrogent             2.43                3.42
Methanet              0.40                0.53
Carbon dioxidet       0.156               0.202

*liquid
t gas
   If you have read this far without giving up, you have probably got
some inkling of the important features of working fluids, and the way
that an engineer will deal with fluid properties; good for you! Now we will
put this information together with energy balances to study some
interesting systems.

COMPONENT ENERGETICS

  Any complex device contains a number of components that must be
analyzed individually in the course of an overall analysis. The approach
IS;


      1 Define the system.
      2 Make approximations and idealizations.
      3 Write the energy balance.
      4 Use property information to finish the calculation.

We will now illustrate this procedure for a number of simple devices;
these examples display a systematic methodology of engineering analysis
                                                   FLOW SYSTEM ENERGETICS    113



and also serve to introduce several ideas about the systems considered.
Again, our objective is not to make you skilled at such analysis, but
merely to acquaint you with what is involved.
   Let's first consider a tank containing 100 lbm of liquid. Suppose we
want to increase the liquid temperature from 50°F to l 10°F (a change of
60°R). Figure 4.14 shows the system; note the carefully positioned dots,
which enclose only the liquid. Q is therefore the amount of energy transfer
as heat from the immersion heater to the liquid. We will neglect energy
transfer as heat from the liquid to the tank walls. Also, we will assume            't
that at the beginning and end of the process the temperature of the
liquid is uniform throughout the tank, so that each lbm has the same
internal energy. This will allow us to represent the total internal energy
as U = Mu. Then, since M is constant, AU = MAU. The energy
balance is

    Q              AU                                                       (4.6)
  energy       increase in
  input        energy storage                                                       ,i
                                                                                    ~:
Now we use the liquid-property information to relate the internal energy            i~

change to the temperature change. Using Eq. (4.4) and a cv value of                 ,.
0.5 Btu/lbm- 0 R,

   Au = cv AT = 0.5 Btu/lbm- 0 R x 60°R               30 Btu/lbm

Substituting into the energy balance,

   Q = M Au = 100 lbm x 30 Btu/lbm = 3,000 Btu

Now the engineer (or you!) can decide how long this heating operation               'l
should take, and then determine the required heat-transfer rate. If we
want to do the job in 6 min, which is 0.1 hr,

           Q       3,000 Btu
                                   30,000 Btu/hr
                     O.l hr
                                                                                     ',
                                                                                    i '




                           FIG. 4.14   THE SYSTEM IS THE OIL.



                                                                                          I
114   ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN




This is about 8.8 kw; so we could purchase a 10-kw immersion heater and
expect to be able to heat the liquid easily in 6 min. However, the liquid
might get too hot at the heater surface; if so, we might stir it, thereby
increasing the convective heat-transfer coefficient and lowering the heater
surface temperature [see Eq. (3.8)]. You can think about the energetics
of the system with the stirrer in place; under what conditions would you
have to take the stirrer power into consideration?




                        i
                        i
                    ___ j__

                                         FIG. 4.15   THE SYSTEM IS THE AIR.




   Let's look now at a different kind of heating process. The air in the
cylinder of the little engine in Fig. 4.15 will be heated, but the piston will
move in such a way as to keep the air pressure constant at 100 psia. The
cylinder cross-sectional area is 2 in 2 , and we want to move the piston
such that the length L changes from 3 to 5 in as we transfer energy into
the air as heat from the hot cylinder base. The initial air temperature is
500°R (40°F). The problem is to calculate the amount of energy transfer
as heat required. Again we have marked the system to be analyzed by
dots in Fig. 4.15. Note that, in addition to the energy inflow as heat Q,
there is an energy outflow as work W done by the air on the piston. So,
the energy balance is


      Q
  energy
             w + increase
           energy
                      llU
                          in-
                                                                              (4.7)
  in       out          energy storage


We want to solve for Q, so we'll have to come up with numbers for both
Wand /lU. The work W can be calculated from the force and displace-
ment of the piston; the force is the gas pressure P times the piston area A,
so

   W =PA llL                                                                  (4.8)
                                                FLOW SYSTEM ENERGETICS   115




                2
T
                                                                                            I


                                                                                        l'

                                             FIG. 4.16 PROCESS REPRESENTA-
                    p                        TION FOR THE AIR.



Putting in the numbers,
                                                                               r            ,
    W = 100 lbf/in 2 x 2 in 2 x (5 - 3) in = 400 in-lbf

Now, since U = Mu and AU= M Au, we can use Eq. (4.4) to calculate              '.,
Au if we can find the final temperature.* Now we must ponder; should
we assume that the temperature remains constant? Do we have enough
information to determine the final temperature? Here a process represen-
tation (Fig. 4.16) helps us to see what to do. Using Fig. 4. 7 as a guide,
we see that the temperature will increase as the gas volume is increased
at constant pressure. If we had an accurate chart, we could read off the
temperature and internal changes directly; let's instead use the ideal-gas
approximation [Eq. 4.1)]. Using subscripts I and 2 to denote the initial
and final states, Eq. (4.1) givest
                                                                                   ,,
    V1P1 =   RT1                                                                .~
                                                                               11 ~
    v2 P 2 = RT2                                                                        I




Dividing the second by the first and canceling out the equal pressures          ; l
andR,




*Remember, Eq. (4.4) works for a gas even if the volume does change.
                                                                                            J

t Remember that v = 1/P.                                                           'i
116   ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN




Now, v2 /v 1 = L 2 /L 1 = 5/3 = 1.67. So,


                          500°R x 1.67 = 833°R


Now we can calculate /J.u from Eq. (4.4),

   /J.u = cv /J.T = 0.171 Btu/lbm- 0 R x (833-500) 0 R = 56.9 Btu/lbm

We'll need the air mass; from Eq. (4.1), the air density is

                          1.44 x 104 lbf/ft2      = 0.54 lbm/ft3
                     53.3 ft-lbf/lbm- 0 R x 500°R

Now, the initial volume is

   V1 = AL 1 = 2in 2 x 3in = 6in 3 = 3.47 x 10- 3 ft 3

so the air mass is

   M = V1 p 1 = 3.47 x 10- 3 ft 3 x 0.54 lbm/ft 3        1.86 x 10- 3 lbm

Thus, the internal energy change is

   /J.U = M /J.u = 1.86 x 10- 3 lbm x 56.9 Btu/lbm = 0.106 Btu

We are now ready to use Eq. (4.7) to calculate Q. But we can't add Btu
to in-lbf, so let's convert W from in-lbf to Btu;

   W = 400 in-lbf 1 Btu = 0. 043 Btu
        12 in/ft 778 ft-lbf

Finally, using Eq. (4.7),

   Q = 0.043 Btu + 0.106 Btu = 0.149 Btu

Note that some of the energy input as heat goes into increasing the internal
energy and the rest goes out of the system as work.
   Well, that was a long problem. But it was a very simple problem, and
so perhaps you sense the complexity that an engineer must deal with in
energy-system analysis. Shortcuts are always looked for, and there is a
                                            FLOW SYSTEM ENERGETICS      117         1




slightly shorter way to do this problem; noting from Eq. (4.8) that for a
constant-pressure process,                                                     ,,, I




   W= PAV           (P = constant)                                     (4.9)

and that V = Mv, we can write (Mis constant too!)
                                                                               1!
                                                                               ,I
   W = MP Av = M A(Pv)             (P = constant)                     (4.10)

Then, the energy balance may be written as

   Q = M Au + M A(Pv)            (P = constant)

Recalling the definition of enthalpy, h = u + Pv, we see that for our
constant-pressure process the energy balance is equivalent to

   Q = MAh          (P = constant)                                    (4.11)

So, we need only to evaluate the enthalpy change to get the energy input
as heat for this constant-pressure process. We calculate the final temper-
ature as before, and then,

   Ah = cP AT= 0.24 Btu/lbm- 0 R x (833-500) 0 R          80 Btu/lbm

Finally,

   Q = M Ah = 1.86 x 10- 3 Ihm x 80 Btu/lbm = 0.149 Btu

as found previously. You might guess (correctly) that engineers find that
the enthalpy will be particularly useful whenever one deals with a con-
stant-pressure process.
   As a third example, let's consider the heating of air in a tube. We will
pass an electric current through the walls of the tube to do this job, and
the problem is to calculate the amount of electrical power that must be
supplied. This problem is included to illustrate the manner in which an
engineer will deal with a system through which there is some fluid flow,
which includes most systems of any real interest. Figure 4.17 shows the
system to be analyzed. The dotted lines in Fig. 4.l 7a surround the region
in space between the two sections I and 2. Mass enters at section I and
leaves at section 2, and these mass flows carry energy in and out of our
system. You might think that, if the mass flow rate is M Ihm/sec, the
energy inflow rate at section I should be Mu; but this is not quite correct,
118    ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN




                                                             ')
                                                             .._
                                   (a)




                                   (c)                                  2


      .._r;.:t;.:--• ·-· --- iii- --- . ( ~-. . . --· ..::,,j.....,_
      W1 t-. --· ·              .... --- -·- --- - -- ·- -    .. ...1       W2
                                   (d)

FIG. 4.17 FIGURES FOR THE
HEATER ANALYSIS. (a) THE
"CONTROL VOLUME," (b) THE MASS
AT TIME 0. (c) THE MASS AT TIME
t. (d) ENERGY FLOWS FOR THE
MASS.


as we shall see. Since we are not sure of just how to make a proper energy
balance on a system with flow entering, let's instead consider a fixed-
matter system that we do know how to handle, and see what we get. This
system is shown in Fig. 4.17b; it consists of all the material within the
heater at time 0 plus the little piece of fluid that will enter the heater
between time 0 and time t. Figure 4.l 7b shows the position of this fixed-
matter system at time 0, and Fig. 4.l 7c shows its position at time t. Note
that the ends of this system move, and hence there will be energy transfers
as work associated with these end motions; these are the terms that we
miss if we are not careful in the analysis, and they are important. The
energy balance, over the time period 0 - t, is

      W1    + Q            W2       +        f!.U                                (4.12)
           energy         energy         increase in
           in             out            energy storage


We shall assume that steady-state conditions exist; this means that the
amount of energy stored between sections 1 and 2, which we'll denote
                                                 FLOW SYSTEM ENERGETICS           119
                                                                                         1, '.




by U 12 , does not change. Thus, the change in the internal energy of the
fixed-matter system is

   AU =     Ufina1 -   U;nitia1

                                                                                (4.13)

where U 1 is the amount of energy stored in the shaded space upstream of
section l and U 2 is the amount of energy stored in the shaded space down-
stream of section 2. We can relate these energy-storage terms to the mass
contained in the shaded spaces,

                                                                             (4.l4a,b)

where u1 and u2 are the specific internal energies of the fluid at sections
1 and 2, respectively, and M 1 and M 2 are the masses of the two shaded
regions. The volumes of the shaded regions can be related to the flow
velocities and the flow areas at sections 1 and 2. Now a symbol problem
arises; we want to use V for both velocity and volume; let's use f for
volume and V for velocity. Then, the volumes of the shaded regions are

                                                                             (4.15a,b)

So, since mass = density x volume,

                                                                             (4.16a,b)

Ifwe divide M 1 by t, the time it takes for the mass M 1 to cross section 1,
we have the "mass flow rate" at section 1, which we shall denote by M 1
(remember overdots are used to denote rates of flow, e.g., lbm/sec,
Btu/sec, etc.),

                           mass flow rate                                       (4.17)

Since we have steady-state conditions at each point in the tube, the
principle of conservation of mass* requires that the mass coming out at
section 2 must exactly balance the mass coming in,

                                                                                (4.18)

* Mass, as energy, is conserved; so we keep books on mass in the same way.                   i•,


                                                                                           'I
120   ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN




So we'll denote M = M 1 = M2 • Then M 1 = M 2 = Mt, and using
Eq. (4.14) in Eq. (4.13), we can now express the energy change in the
fixed-matter system in terms of the mass flow rate M and the specific
internal energies of the fluid at section 1 and 2,

   AUfixed-mass =   M(u2 - Ui)t                                          (4.19)
       system


Now we have to calculate the work terms W 1 and W 2 in Eq. (4.12). The
force on the upstream end of the cylinder of fluid that we are aaalyzing
is P 1 A 1 , and this force pushes the fluid a distance V1 t. So, the work input
to the fixed-matter system is

                                                                        (4.20a)

This represents the work done on the fluid mass by fluid behind it pushing
it across section 1. Similarly, the work output at the other end, where the.
fluid pushes its way out of the pipe, is

                                                                        (4.20b)

This represents the work that the fluid does in pushing other fluid out of
the way so that it can cross section 2. Since v1 p 1 = 1, we can multiply
the right-hand side of Eq. (4.20a) by v1 p 1 without changing its value,
and thus




Recalling Eq. (4.17), this is equivalent to

                                                                        (4.2la)

Similarly,

                                                                        (4.2lb)

Now we stick Eqs. (4.21) and (4.19) back into the basic energy balance
[Eq. (4.12)] and obtain

                                                                         (4.22)

This is the correct energy balance for the heater tube. We worked it out
for a fixed-matter system consisting of a cylinder of fluid in the act of
                                                      FLOW SYSTEM ENERGETICS       121



passing through the tube; but we can interpret it as an energy balance
on the system in Fig. 4.l 7a, the region in space ("control volume") between
sections I and 2, as follows:

      Q                               (u 2 + P 2 v2 )Mt
    energy                               energy outflow
    inflow                               with mass
    as heat


Note that the amount of energy that enters the "control volume" at
section I with each Ihm is (u + Pv) 1 . The u is the convected internal                    l
energy per unit mass, and the product Pv is the work that must be done
by the next fluid coming along to push a unit mass into the control
volume. In this situation the term Pv is called the "flow work"; it will
always appear in energy balances wherever mass flows across the bound-
aries of a system. Note that the sum u + Pv is the enthalpy; in this
situation the enthalpy h1 represents the total energy flow across section
 I per uni( of mass. We will use the term "flow energy" as a synonym for
enthalpy,* which always appears in the energy balance on a control
volume wherever mass crosses the boundaries. Now you can see why
engineers are so eager to have enthalpy data on their property charts;
it is a very handy property in any flow system analysis!
    This was a very complicated analysis, yet it leads to a very simple
final result, and this is something that is very typical of good engineering
analysis. Ifwe divide Eq. (4.22) by t, we obtain an equation for the heat-
transfer rate Q = Q/t,

    Q         +        Mh 1      Mh   2                                         (4.23)
      rate of energy          rate of
      input                   energy output


Note the interpretation of Eq. (4.23) as an energy balance on the control
volume (Fig. 4.l 7a), written on a "rate basis." For steady-state conditions
there is no change in the energy stored within the control volume, and so
no energy-storage term appears above. Rearranging Eq. (4.23),

                                                                                (4.24)

So, we see that the energy input to the control volume as heat shows up
as an increase in the enthalpy of the fluid as it passes through the control
volume. Simple expressions like Eq. (4.24) can be developed for many
components of interest in the engineering of a power system; but what a
lot of clever work it takes to get there!
                                                                                          i
*Sometimes the enthalpy is called the "heat content" or "sensible heat," which does not
really seem very sensible to modern thermodynamicists.                                     "
                                                                                          .I
     122   ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN




         In the previous piston-cylinder example the enthalpy arose in a
     constant-pressure process. Here it arises in a flow process, which need not
     be a constant-pressure process. In other words, P 2 need not be the same
     as P 1 for Eq. (4.24) to apply. However, it happens that the pressure drop
     in heater tubes like this is usually small in comparison with the value
     of the pressure, and so engineers often model steady-flow heater problems
     by assuming that the fluid pressure is constant throughout the heater.·
        If you are sharp, you may have noticed that this analysis carries a
     number of implicit assumptions. Let's make them explicit; we neglected
     the kinetic and potential energies of the fluid, assumed that every piece of
     fluid that enters comes in at the same state (which sort of ignores the
     effects of the tube walls on the flow), and made a similar assumption for
     the exit flow. These are good assumptions in most cases, and where
     they are not a competent engineer can fix things up by doing a more
     complicated theory.
!I
         Let's put in some numbers to Eq. (4.24). Suppose we want to heat
     4,000 lbm/hr of air from 60 to 140°F. We use the equation-of-state
     information to relate the enthalpy change to the temperature change~
     from Eq. (4.5), which holds for gases even ifthe pressure is not constant,
!
        h2 - h 1 = cp(T2 -    T 1 ) = 0.24 Btu/lbm- R x 80°R = 19.2 Btu/lbm
                                                    0




I'   Then,

:I      Q = 4,000 lbm/hr x 19.2 Btu/lbm = 7.68 x 10 4 Btu/hr
     This is equivalent to 22.6 kw. A heat-transfer analysis allows the engineer
     to calculate the temperature distribution along the tube that will develop
     when this power is supplied (a careful engineer would check to be sure
     that the tube will not melt!).
         For our next example, let's suppose we have a geothermal well that
     produces 10,000 lbm/hr of hot steam at 100 psia and 400°F. We would
     like to run this steam through a steam turbine to generate power, and
     are curious about how much power we could obtain. Figure 4.18a shows
     the system that the engineer would analyze. It is a control volume en-
     closing the turbine and cutting across the intake and discharge pipes at
     sections 1 and 2, respectively. The engineer would assume that "steady-
     state" conditions exist, which means that at any point within the control
     volume nothing changes in time (though of course the state of the fluid
     passing through the control volume changes as the fluid moves through).
     He could go through the business of taking a fixed-matter system, letting
     it slip a little ways through the turbine, etc., as in the previous example.
                                                                               FLOW SYSTEM ENERGETICS        123




r ··- .... j..e- -
                  2        t             Discharge


        I
        - - i I                 1



        '~                                                       h
        I   I I W                                                    i
' '1--j ,                                                            i
                                                                     'i
          t
'--   ..... , _   .... »   ...........   ,_,.



                                                                     'I
      1           Steam supply                                       I
                                                                     I
                                                                     L-------...~------·---~·--------~~
                                                                                    s
                           (a)                                                      (b)

FIG. 4.18 STEAM-TURBINE
ANALYSIS. (a) THE CONTROL
VOLUME, (b) THE PROCESS
REPRESENTATION.


You can guess what he would get; he would find that the energy input
rate to the control volume at section l is simply Mh 1 and the energy
output rate at section 2 is Mh 2 (if you are not convinced, repeat the
developments of the previous example for the new system). Since he has
done this numerous times as a student, he knows what he will get, and
just writes down the final result*                                                                                 ''
                                                                                                                   '

          Mh  1 =                               Mh 2 + W                                                  (4.25)
       rate                                     rate of
       of energy                                energy outflow
       inflow


Solving for the power output W,

                                                                                                          (4.26)

Now, we know the mass flow rate M. So, if we can establish the inlet and
discharge enthalpies, we can compute the power output from Eq. (4.26).
Figure 4.13 (or a larger, more complete chart) helps here. The inlet
conditions are known, and we can read the inlet enthalpy off the chart;
for 100 psia and 400°F, the chart gives h 1 = 1,225 Btu/lbm. The dis-
charge will be to atmospheric pressure, and so point 2 must lie somewhere
along the line P = 14.7 psia in Fig. 4.13; but where? A second-law

* Our reference to the engineer as a "he" should not discourage a "she" from entering
the engineering profession!
124    ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN



analysis, which is just a tad beyond us at this point, tells us that the
specific entropy of the discharge fluid must be at least as large as the
specific entropy at the inlet, in order that the device may produce entropy,
as the second law of thermodynamics requires. This means that the dis-
charge state must lie to the right of the point marked 2s in Fig. 4.18b;
but where? Wherever it lies, the difference hi - h2 will be less than the
difference hi - h2 • (see Fig. 4.18b). So, the maximum power output is

                                                                      (4.27)

We can read h2 • from Fig. 4.13 as 1,075 Btu/lbm (drop a plumb line
down from state 1 and read the intersection with the lineP = 14.7 psia).
So,

   Wmax        10,000 lbm/hr x (1,225 - 1,075) Btu/lbm

               1.5 x 10 6 Btu/hr

This is equivalent to 440 kw or 590 hp, enough to operate some light
machinery. However, we won't be able to get the maximum power,
because real turbines have friction, turbulence, and other irreversible
factors that degrade the performance. Engineers rate the performance
of real turbines in terms of the "isentropic efficiency," which is the ratio
of the actual power output to the power output from the ideal device
 ("isentropic" means constant entropy; note that the ideal process 1 - 2s
is one of constant entropy). The isentropic efficiency is usually denoted
by the Greek symbol Y/ ("eta"), with a subscripts to avoid confusion with
cycle efficiency in power plant usage. It is defined by

   Y/ s =
             W
            - .-  =
                      hi - h2
                      --"-----"-                                     (4.28)
            W max     hi - hzs
A modern steam turbine in this power range might have an isentropic
efficiency of about 80% at "design conditions" (recall our discussion of
the performance of turbines in Chap. 2). For our turbine,

   W = 0.8 x 1.5 x 10 6 Btu/hr = 1.2 x 10 6 Btu/hr
which is about 350 kw or 470 hp. The actual discharge enthalpy h2
can now be calculated, and point 2 fixed on the chart (see Fig. 4.18b).
You should work this out and verify that h2 = 1,105 Btu/lbm.
   The analysis of more complex systems involves the systematic analysis
of each component. Using the energy balance and property data, together
with performance parameters such as the isentropic efficiency, the
                                                FLOW SYSTEM ENERGETICS   125



Table 4.3
Steady-Flow Energy Analyses for Common Components

       System              E"'ergy Balance              Mocie! Pnxe-ss
Heater
                                                  I~i
                                                   '

           I
  ~

 M    )>
      1



valve

      ~

Nozzle
  f \._z.
~
  V1J ----
Compressor
orp~ump 2...
                         11 ,,.Ni (h, -h 1)
                         l'Js"'· ~ ; his-hi
      w                        t1/   hz.-h_1_
                     l
               .NI
                                                  t
                                                  !            /
                                                                               '.1
                                                  '
                                                  !     1 /

                                                h1;1,,1~1M
                                                  ~-----·?­
                                                              S'

engineer will work through the entire system. In Table 4.3 we have sum-
marized the steady-flow, steady-state energy balances, process represen-
tations, and performance parameters for the most common components.
You should try to derive the energy balances for yourself, listing the
idealizations that are implicit in the equations. Our purpose here is not
      126   ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN




                                Compressor

                                              p



                From outside                                    h
                       (a)                                     (b)
      FIG. 4.19 HEAT-PUMP ANALYSIS.
      (a) THE SYSTEM. (b) THE PROCESS
      REPRESENTATION.


      to make you an expert analyst, but you will find that the better the
      feeling you have for thermodynamic analysis the better you will be able.
      to understand new energy systems. And the more you understand about
ii    technology, the better you are prepared to see that it works for the benefit
      of you and your society.
         Let's illustrate the treatment of a full system by analysis of a heat pump.
~r'   Our objective is again to give you some insight into engineering analysis,

i~
      and not to give you the skill to do your own. Figure 4.19 shows the
      system hardware and the fluid-process representation· (see Fig. 4.1 l ).
      Freon-12 refrigerant enters the compressor at 10 psia and -20°F, and is
      compressed to 140 psia. The warm freon then passes through a heat
      exchanger, where it is condensed by a transfer of energy as heat from the
      freon to the cooler air inside the house. The liquid freon (state 3) then
      goes through a valve, which drops the pressure back down to 10 psia,
      reducing the temperature to about -35°F. The cold freon then goes
      through a heat exchanger, where it is evaporated (boiled) by energy
      transfer as heat from the colder air outside the house. Since the freon in the
      evaporator is at -35°F, the outside temperature can't be any lower than
      this, and an outdoor temperature of - l0°F might be practical here.
      Similarly, the air in the house must be cooler than the freon condensing
      temperature of l 05°F, which of course is the case.
         The fluid is free to expand and equalize the pressure in the condenser
      and all the piping between the compressor and the valve. Some slight
      pressure drop in the direction of fluid flow is required to make the flow
      move and overcome friction, but this pressure drop is small compared
      with the pressure changes encountered in the valve and compressor.
                                          FLOW SYSTEM ENERGETICS     127



Hence, in a preliminary analysis like this it is quite a good assumption
that the pressure drops in the heat exchangers are negligible.
   The energy balances on the four components are (see Table 4.3; the
overdots denote rates of flow).

      Compressor:
      W = M(h 2 - hi)                                              (4.29)

      Condenser:
      Qc = M(h 2 - h3)                                             (4.30)

      Valve:
      h4 = h3                                                      (4.31)

      Evaporator:
      QE = M(hi - h4)                                              (4.32)

The game is now to pin down all four states on the property map; this
will give us the enthalpies. We begin at state 1, where we know enough
to fix the enthalpy; from Fig. 4.11, at 10 psia and -20°F,

      h 1 = 75 Btu/lbm

We know the compressor discharge pressure P 2 but do not know enough
to pinpoint state 2 on the property chart. As in the turbine example just
discussed, a second-law analysis tells us that the entropy of the outflow
must be larger than the entropy of the inflow in order that entropy may
be produced in the compressor, and hence state 2 must lie to the right of
state 2s indicated in Fig. 4.19b. Thus, the enthalpy change h2 - h 1 must
be at least as large as h 2 • - hi, and hence the minimum compressor
power requirement is

                                                                  (4.33)

Reading from Fig. 4.11 at the intersection of the constant-entropy line
through point 1 and the 140 psia pressure line, we find

  h2s =        98 Btu/lbm

So,

      Wmin     = 98 - 75 = 23 Btu/lbm
       M
       128    ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN




       To fix the actual state 2 we need to know the "isentropic efficiency" of
       the compressor, defined by


                                                                           (4.34)


       Let's assume that the compressor isentropic efficiency is 85%; so

          w       Wmin/M = ~ = 27 Btu/lbm
          M         0.85          0.85

       Then, from Eq. (4.29),


         h2 = h1 + -
                           w = 75 + 27     102 Btu/lbm
                        M

       Now that we know both h2 and P2 , we can pinpoint state 2 on the property.
       chart.
          State point 3 is on the saturated-liquid line at its intersection with
lfil   the 140 psia line, and we read

         h 3 = 31 Btu/lbm


~i
       We can now calculate the condenser heat transfer per unit of mass flow;
 ;'I   using Eq. (4.30),

          ~ = h2 - h 3 = 102 - 31 = 71 Btu/lbm

       Note that the horizontal distance h2 - h 3 represents condenser heat-
       transfer rate per unit of mass flow.
          Finally, since h4 = h3 from the valve energy balance, h4 = 31
       Btu/lbm. Then, from Eq. (4.32),

          ~ = h 1 - h4 = 75 - 31 = 44 Btu/lbm

       We can (and should) check these numbers with an overall energy balance
       on the entire system; this is

          fV + QE               QC                                         (4.35)
         energy input      energy output
         rate              rate
                                             FLOW SYSTEM ENERGETICS       129



Dividing by M, and using the numbers developed above,

   27 Btu/lbm + 44 Btu/lbm = 71 Btu/lbm

Things check as they should.
  The "coefficient of performance" of the heat pump is defined as

   COP = Qc == Qc/M = I!_ = 2.6
         W W/.M 27
So, 2.6 times as much energy as we take from the electric grid to run the
compressor will be transferred into the house as heat!
   Suppose that we want to supply 100,000 Btu/hr to the house. Then,
from Eq. (4.30),

   M =       Qc        = 10s Btu/hr = 1,410 lbm/hr
          h2 -    h3     71 Btu/lbm

So, freon will have to be circulated through the system at the rate of
1,410 lbm/hr. From Eq. (4.29), the compressor power input will have to
be

   W = 1,410 lbm/hr x (102 -          75) Btu/lbm = 3.8 x 10 4 Btu/hr

which is slightly more than 11 kw and about 15 hp. Note how we first
calculated our way around the cycle without knowing the mass flow
rate .M, and then found the M required to obtain the overall system
performance.
    You have now seen a glimpse of thermodynamic analysis. The engineer
who does this for real has studied hard and long to really master the
subject; he can analyze anything thrown at him with the full confidence
that his systematic approach will get him a good answer. A lot of analysis
like this has (or should have) been done in the study of any new energy
system that you may read about. The brief glimpse here should help
you understand the process of engineering analysis and perhaps will
help you. ask the right questions when you encounter a group trying to
sell a particular energy system to the public.

POWER SYSTEMS

    Fluid systems designed for the generation of power fall into two classes.
The term "vapor power cycles" refers to systems in which the working
fluid occurs in the system in both liquid and gas (vapor) states; steam
                    130   ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN




                    power plants are an example. In "gas power cycles" the working fluid
                    is a gas at every point, as, for example, in a gas-turbine engine. The term
                    "cycle" is used because the working fluid flows around through the
                    systems, executing a cycle of states. In "closed cycles" the fluid is com-
                    pletely contained with the system, while in "open cycles" the fluid comes
                    from and is returned to the environment, which in turn closes the cycle.
                    In this section we will discuss the basic thermodynamics of some of the
                    more important power cycles, vapor and gas, open and closed. This will
                    be at a level that you may well encounter in your reading; if you developed
                    just a little insight from the previous material in this chapter, yo~ should
                    grasp the main ideas without difficulty.




                            2



[,




                                                                            s
                    FIG. 4.20   RANKINE CYCLE.



               Let's begin with a look at the "Rankine cycle,'' the basic cycle for
            vapor power systems. The system diagram and process representation
            are shown in Fig. 4.20. Liquid enters the pump at state 1, is compressed
            and fed to the boiler. The phase change occurs in the boiler, and the
            "superheated" steam (meaning steam hotter than the saturation temper-
            ature at that pressure) is fed to the turbine. In the turbine the flow is first
            accelerated to high velocity in nozzles; the high-speed flow jets against
            the turbine blades, which extract kinetic energy from the flow stream.
            The stream passes out of the turbine at a low velocity, and is condensed
            to return the fluid to the liquid state. As in the heat pump discussed in
            the previous section, the boiler and condensing processes are modeled
            as constant-pressure processes. The enthalpy-entropy plane (called the
            "Mollier diagram" in the trade) is used because it shows the energetics
_ _ _ _ _ _ and irreversibilities quite well.
                                           FLOW SYSTEM ENERGETICS      131



   The energy balances (see Table 4.3) on the four components are

   Pump:
      Wp         M(h 2 - h1)

   Boiler:
      Qb     =   M(h 3 - h2 )
                                                                    (4.36)
   Turbine:


   Condenser:



You can see that the enthalpy differences, which are vertical distances on
the Mollier diagram, represent energy transfers per unit mass of fluid
passing through the device. In the boiler the fluid is heated, increasing
its entropy, and in the condenser the cooling reduces the fluid entropy.
A good model is that there is no heat transfer to the fluid in the pump
or turbine, and hence the entropy ideally could remain constant through
these devices. The increase in entropy experienced by the fluid in passing
through the pump and turbine is a measure of the irreversibility of these
devices caused by fluid friction, bearing friction, turbulence, etc. A glob
of fluid executing the complete cycle has no total change in its entropy      1,
(it starts from point 1 and returns there), but there is an associated in-
crease in the entropy of the environment as a result of the heat transfers
Qb and Qc.
    Let's look at some of the salient features of the Rankine cycle. Since.
vertical distances on the h-s diagram represent flow energy changes,
one can get a good idea about the relative magnitudes of the works and
heat from the h-s picture (provided that it is drawn to scale!). Note that
the difference h2 - h1 is very small in comparison with h 3 - h4 . This
means that the pump work input will be small in comparison with the
turbine work output. So it won't really matter if the pump has a low
efficiency; the turbine will provide much more than enough work to
drive the pump. In the jargon of the trade, the Rankine cycle has a "low
back work ratio," meaning that the work input to the cycle is only a
small fraction of the work output. This is a main reason why vapor
power cycles were successful half a century before gas power cycles,
which tend to have much higher back work ratios.
132   ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN



                     ,--
                     (p




h




FIG. 4.21   THE PRIMED CYCLE HAS THE GREATER EFFICIENCY.



    The ideas of the second law suggest that the best performance is
obtained when the "heat-rejection temperature," i.e., the condensing
temperature, is as low as possible. Figure 4.21 gives another view of this
fact. There we see two Rankine cycles with identical boiling temperatui'es
but different condensing temperatures. The heat input per lbm of fluid
(h 3 - h2 ) is the same for both cycles, but the work output for the primed
cycle is much greater because the turbine enthalpy change is greater.
The condensing temperature must be somewhat above the environment
temperature, and 100°F condensing temperatures are not uncommon.
    If water is used as the working fluid, the vapor pressure at 100°F is
less than l psia, which is less than atmospheric pressure; so, care must
be taken to prevent air from leaking into the condenser, and provisions
must be made for removing any air leakage and for creating the vacuum
in the first place. Most steam plants employ "steam ejectors" for this
purpose (Fig. 4.22). A small supply of steam bled from the boiler is


High-
pressure
steam




FIG. 4.22 JET EJECTORS ARE OFTEN USED TO KEEP A         LOW PRESSURE IN
THE CONDENSER.
    ;."




                                                       FLOW SYSTEM EN.ERGETICS      133


•
          passed through a "venturi" device, which accelerates the flow and drops
          the steam pressure. This provides a low-pressure region that can suck air
           (and steam) out of the condenser to provide the needed control of the
          pressure within the condenser.
              The second law also says that raising the temperatures at which heat
          is added raises the cycle efficiency. You can draw a diagram like Fig.
          4.21 to convince yourself of that. The peak temperature· is limited by
          metallurgical conditions, and most steam turbines operate with inlet
          temperatures of the order of 1000°F.
              As the steam flows through the turbine nozzles, it follows the path
          indicated by the dotted line 3-4 in Fig. 4.20. If this carries the steam state
          into the vapor dome, water droplets will begin to form, and if enough
          droplets form, they can do serious damage to the turbine blades by
          whamming against them at speeds of the order of 3,000 ft/sec. So, power
          plant designers must take particular care to be sure that the steam in the
          turbine does not get too "wet." There are many other practical problems
          associated with steam-turbine design, such as lubrication, speed control,
          and dynamical balancing, and all these factors must be carefully con-            •
          sidered by the engineers who do the turbine design. The thermodynamicist
          generally has an easier time; he can simply specify that the turbine· be
          designed for such and such an inlet state, discharging to such and such a
          pressure, and that the turbine should have an isentropic efficiency of so
          much. Then, the hard work is left up to the engineers who must design
          a turbine meeting these specifications.
              There are many modifications to the basic Rankine cycle that are
          employed in large steam power plants. "Reheat," in which the turbine
          is split into two units and the steam leaving the first is reheated before it
          flows to the second, is quite common. You can draw the process represen-
          tation for a reheat cycle, and see how this affects the wetness of the steam
          in the turbine. In "regeneration," some hot steam is bled from early
          stages of the turbine (see Fig. 2.23), and this is in turn used to partially
          heat the water entering the boiler. This bootstrapping process reduces the
          energy that must be supplied as heat in the boiler, and thus increases the
          cycle efficiency. Large power stations may incorporate several stages of
          reheat and regeneration, each stage inching the overall system efficiency
          up by a percentage point or so.
              At higher temperatures the vapor pressure of water becomes very high,
          and there is a great deal of interest in Rankine cycles using other working
          fluids. There was a major effort in the space program to develop Rankine
          power plants for space vehicles using exotic working fluids such as
          mercury, potassium, and rubidium, and the technological developments
          from these SNAP (Space Nuclear Auxiliary Power) systems are finding
134   ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN

                 •
use in consumer energy systems. There is now a great deal of interest in
"binary power cycles," systems that employ two separate Rankine cycles.
A fluid well suited for high-temperature operation, such as mercury, is
used in the "topping" cycle. Energy is added as heat to the mercury,
and the energy removed as heat in the mercury condenser is used as the
heat input to the boiler of a conventional steam power plant. A system
of this sort has been in service for many years, operating with a cycle
efficiency of the order of 40%. Other binary systems using things like
sulfur and steam as the working fluids have been studied; these offer
overall efficiencies as high as 50%, and we may see some exotic binary
Rankine systems being built in the years ahead.
    We have not said much about the source of energy for the Rankine
cycle. In conventional systems a fossil fuel is burned in the boiler and the
flames are passed over the tubes containing water. The steam rises to a.
"steam drum" overhead, and any liquid brought up is recirculated by
gravity to the boiler. A separate superheater is usually employed to heat
the steam to a higher temperature; some newer units have the super-
heating coils as part of the main boiler. Figure 4.23 shows a typical lai'ge
power station boiler.
    There are two basic schemes used in nuclear plants that use steam in a
Rankine cycle. In the first, water is boiled right in the reactor to make the
steam. The second uses a liquid coolant such as sodium or water at high
pressure in the reactor, and then circulates the coolant to a separate heat
exchanger, where energy is removed from the reactor coolant as heat to
boil water in the steam-turbine cycle. Figures 4.24 and 4.25 show some
of the details of these two types of nuclear power systems. We'll learn more
about nuclear reactors in Chap. 7.
    The "heat sink" for power plant "waste heat" (the condenser heat
transfer) also deserves some comment. The second law of thermodynamics
suggests that low sink temperatures give the best cycle efficiency. So,
engineers try to place power plants in cold areas; a few degrees reduction
in the sink temperature can mean a percent increase in efficiency, and
this can mean millions of dollars over the lifetime of the plant. Rivers,
lakes, and the ocean are the primary heat sinks for power stations in the
United States. Water is pumped to the plant, heated by the energy
removed from the steam in the condenser, and returned to the river or
ocean. Temperature increases of 10 to 30°F are typical; since marine life
tolerates only small variations in temperature,· this type of "thermal
pollution" can have a profound effect on marine life in the river, lake,
or ocean near the discharge. Not only will fish die when a plant is in-
stalled, but species that come to populate the warmer waters near the
plant will die when the plant is shut down for maintenance; both types
  Steam
  drum'




                                                                 urners



   Water
   drum                                                                      .,,
                                                                             5
                                                                          • ~-<
                                                                             (/)

                                                                             (/)
                                                                             -I
                                                                             m
                                                                             5:
                                                                             m
                                                                             z
                                                                             m
                                                                             :IJ
                                                                             Gl
                                                                             m
                                                                             -I
                                                                             n
                                                                             (/)



FIG. 4.23 ARTIST'S CUTAWAY OF A   LARGE   BOILER.   COURTESY OF THE
                                                                             ...
BABCOCK AND WILCOX COMPANY.                                                  ~
136   ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN                                •
             Reactor
            r@Qr
  . .p'-,-:1
  Vt-'  !f--     :
                          1
                           }
                                     3
                                         Turbine
                                               .
                     -w
             ....-               i            -Wt
Pump

             1                           4


                     Condenser
FIG. 4.24    FLOW SCHEMATIC FOR BOILING-WATER REACTOR SYSTEM.


ofkilling hav~ actually occurred. Thus, there is great interest in this prob-
lem today. The impact of a new power plant on the environment m-tlst
be analyzed and a report filed for public inspection, and so power plant
engineers are becoming very conscious of this ecological problem.
   When a water body is not available for use as the beat sink, the.
atmosphere must be used. "Cooling towers" such as that shown in
Fig. 4.26 are often employed. Water that is used to cool the steam in the
condenser is circulated to the tower, where it in turn is cooled by transfer
of energy to the air before being returned to the condenser. Most cooling
towers are of the "wet" variety in which the water is sprayed out into a
stream of air. Some of the water evaporates into the ai.f, removing the
higher-energy water molecules from the liquid droplets and thus reducing
the droplet temperature; the cooled water is then returned to the con-

                      Reactor


      Pump                                   Liquid
                                             coolant
Wp1                                          loop



                                                       Power
                                     """"'--wt         fluid loop
                                             Turbine




FIG. 4.25     FLOW SCHEMATIC FOR REACTORS COOLED BY LIQUIDS.
                                                            Warm air
                                                            outlet
                                                                                                             t:
4ft wìde ---- "
col!ar/walkway \

       7 in thick       --)\~   <'-
                                        170ft
                                      diameter ~

                         l
                         j                t
                                         _e
                                          <;!>                                                                    ·'-..._
                         f
                        !/
                                         .s:::
                                        ......
                                        ..._
                                                                                   :t~<.n::~~"'"'.-
                                                                                                 .. -----~
                                                                                                                            '-...___ Hot water
                                                                                                                                     input


                /i
               !/
                    I
                   !'
                                         Uì
                                         N

                                         " !
                                          '}
                                                                                                                  Asbestos cement
                                                                                                                  boards (fins)
               i                                                               /\
               i                       42 ff- high ------            ~,\                                     t
           ---'>I;~ 26 in thick                                  ,.:: .. \
                                                                     ______    .
                                                                              ~-\




           r1                <'- 325 ft diameter 0
      Cool air
...   i niet
~     FIG. 4.26         COOLING TOWERS FOR THE RANCHO SECO NUCLEAR POWER PLANT. (SCHEMATIC)
138   ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN




denser. A small amount of "makeup water" is required to replace the
water that has been evaporated; about 1 % of the water evaporates for
each 10°F of cooling. In a 680-Mw plant the total cooling flow on a
summer day might be about 15 million gallons per hour, and about
0.3 million gallons per hour of makeup water would be required. So,
wet cooling towers also require a source of water for the power plant
beat rejection, though normally they do use far less water than plants
rejecting heat to a water stream. The water put into the atmosphere will
increase the humidity in the locai area, which is sometimes desirable but
can make life unpleasant for residents nearby. Climatic changes are
becoming factors that, like marine-life impact, must be considered by
power plant engineers in selecting the cooling towers. "Dry'' cooling
towers do not spray water into the air. lnstead the warm water from the
condenser is circulated through finned tubes in the tower, as in an auto-
mobile radiator, and the energy is transferred directly to the air through
the tube walls. Dry towers tend to be larger and more costly than wet
towers, and have not been widely used in large power stations. The size
of the tower can be reduced if the airflow is forced through by a fan, and
dry towers are always of this type. Wet towers frequently use natural
circulation; the beautiful hyperbolic structures of Fig. 4.26 are of this
type, many of which dominate the landscape in England and western
Europe. These are becoming more widely used in the United States.
They are constructed from prestressed concrete shells only a few inches
thick, and represent an example of high technology in the construction
industry.
   Let's now turn to gas power cycles, and consider in particular the gas-
turbine power plant. Figure 4.27 shows the flow schematic and process



                                               A
                                               i
        Combustion chamber                     i
        (heater)       Oc                      ;



             2               3
Compressor
                                           h

                   ~             Turbine


                                               i
                                               L_. _ _ _ _ .______   ----·~,, --·-··----- -   ····--·----------·->
                                                                               s
FIG. 4.27   OPEN-CYCLE GAS-TURBINE SYSTEM (BRAYTON CYCLE).
                                            FLOW SYSTEM ENERGETICS       139



representation for the basic open "Brayton cycle"; ftow enters the com-
pressor from the atmosphere at state I, is pressurized to state 2, heated
in some manner tostate 3, and then passed through the gas turbine and
exhausted to the atmosphere. Energy balances on these three com-
ponents give (see Table 4.3)

   Compressor:


   Heater:
                                                                       (4.37)

   Turbine:



So, again vertical distances on the process representation (Fig. 4.27)
represent the energy transfers per lbm of ftuid handled by the system.
Note that the compressor work input (h 2 - h1 ) is a large fraction of the
turbine work output (h 3 - h4 ). The efficiency of the compressor is
criticai; if it is too low, then the compressor will require more work
output than the turbine can supply, and the plant simply won't run !
This was quite the case in the early days of gas-turbine-engine develop-
ment; the compressors were so bad that the engines had to be driven
externally ! The first engines to be self-sustaining took practically all the
turbine power to run the compressor, and so had miserable cycle effi-
ciencies. A massive research and development effort during World War II         Il
led to improvements in compressor technology; today's compressors have
isentropic efficiencies of the order of 65 to 75%, more than adequate to
be matched with modem turbines with isentropic efficiencies of 70
to 80%.
    Note that the Brayton cycle operates between two lines of constant
pressure. On the h-s diagram these lines diverge to the right, and hence
more power output from the turbine can be obtained if the turbine inlet
temperature can be increased. The trouble is that this also increases the
turbine discharge temperature, and hence a lot of energy is thrown away
in the turbine exhaust. A clever scheme has been found for recovering a
lot of this exhaust energy, and this development has made gas-turbine
engines a significant factor in today's energy economy. The idea is to
use the hot turbine exhaust gases to heat the air leaving the compressor,
thereby reducing the amount of energy that must be supplied as heat to
the cycle. This requires a heat exchanger, and Fig. 4.28 shows the
140 ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN




                               5

                                                        s
FIG. 4.28   REGENERATIVE GAS-TURBINE SYSTEM.



position of this "regenerator" or "recuperator" in the system. It is not
possible to heat the compressor flow to a temperature above the turbine
exhaust temperature, but with a good high-performance heat exchanger
perhaps 80 to 90% of the maximum possible heating can be obtainetl.
This greatly reduces the heat that must be supplied by fuel; cycle
efficiencies of the order of 35% are possible with regeneration and good
system design. This may not seem very high, but without regeneration it is
difficult to do much better than 20%.
    Gas-turbine engines are of great interest for mobile power sources,
particularly as "prime movers" for trucks, busses, roadside construction
vehicles, and even automobiles. A number of experimental automobiles
powered by gas-turbine engines have been developed, trucks powered
by gas-turbine engines are now on the market, and gas-turbine engines
now are used in some busses. A breakthrough in regenerator design has
been a big factor in this development. The old style shell-and-tube heat
exchangers just are too big, too heavy for use in mobile systems, and the
"periodic flow regenerator" carne along to save the day. The regenerator
consists of a disk of porous materiai, such as stainless steel or perhaps
ceramic, that is rotated slowly by the engine. Hot turbine exhaust gases
pass through a sector ofthe disk, warming the disk "matrix." The cooler
compressor exhaust is passed through the other sector, taking energy out
of the matrix. As the disk turns, energy is carried by the matrix from one
sector to another, providing the needed coupling between the two flow
streams. The matrix has an enormous amount of surface area, so that the
overall volume of the regenerator is quite small. Figure 4.29 shows a
typical automotive gas-turbine engine with rotary regenerator.
   Gas-turbine engines are also of interest in centrai power stations.
Cycles using helium as the working fluid have been studied for use with
                                           FLOW SYSTEM ENERGETICS          141




                                                                   Regenerator



                                                       r,~i(j
                                                     "coMessor turbine

                 '.t~
               Exhaust
                                                Power
                                               ·turbine
                                                         , f.
                                                            ~y;,

                                                          Exhaust
                            Power torear wheels
FIG. 4.29   AUTOMOTIVE GAS-TURBINE-ENGINE SCHEMATIC.




nuclear heat sources; these cycles must be closed by an additional heat
exchanger that cools the flow from the regenerator discharge back down
to the compressor inlet temperature so that the helium can be recycled.
Such systems have also been proposed as "topping" cycles for helium-
steam binary power plants, with overall efficiencies of the order of 50%
being promised by the analysis. Open-cycle gas-turbine engines, using
combustion offossil fuels as the heat source, are becoming more and more
important for small centrai power stations and for use in industriai plan!s
that require a combination of electrical power and heat for the process
(the hot engine exhaust provides an excellent source for process heat).
   Aircraft jet engines are special examples of gas-turbine engines. In the
basic jet engine the turbine extracts only enough energy to drive the
compressor, as shown in the process diagram of Fig. 4.30. The turbine
discharge, which is still quite energetic, is fed to a nozzle. The nozzle
accelerates the flow to a supersonic speed; it essentially converts some
of the random kinetic energy of the gas molecules into ordered kinetic
energy of the flow stream. The energy balance on the nozzle can be
used to derive


                                                                        (4.38)
142   ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN




                            Heater
                            (combustion
                            chamber)
Compressor
                              Turbine


                                             V

                                  Nozzle

FIG. 4.30   AIRCRAFT JET-ENGINE SYSTEM.


Velocities of the order of 3,000 ft/sec can be obtained from the enthalpy
differences that are available in modem engines. And the isentropic
effi.ciency of nozzles is qui te high; so practically all the available kinetic
energy is realized in the nozzle exhaust. The rush of this high-speed flow
from the engine produces the thrusting force. In order to produce th~
high-speed flow, the engine must push backward very hard on the flow;
this in tum means that the flow pushes forward very hard on the engine,
and this push moves the airplane forward.
    Fan-jet engines are now the most common aircraft engine. These are
essentially gas-turbine engines in which the net work output (turbine
minus compressor work) is used to drive a separate compressor or "fan."
The fan is used to blow more air, much like a propeller, and this air adds
to the thrust of the engine jet. But the fan requires energy, and so not as
much energy is available for the jet. In modem engines most of the thrust
is obtained from the fan and a smaller amount is yielded by the jet. In
effect, the fan-jet engine combines the low-weight-high-po':"er character-
istics of gas-turbine engines with the desirable thrusting properties of
large fans to obtain an optimum engine for the high subsonic range.
    The conventional spark-ignition engine (the "Otto" engine*), used,
for example, in automobiles, is another type of gas power cycle. The
pressure history in a "four-stroke" engine is shown in Fig. 4.31. With the
piston near "top dead center" (TDC), the intake valve is opened and
the air-fuel mixture is sucked into the cylinder during the intake stroke.
The intake valve closes near "bottom dead center" (BDC), and the mix-
ture is compressed during the compression stroke. The spark is fired shortly
before the piston retums to TDC, igniting the combustible mixture.
This release of energy increases the energy and pressure of the gas

• Mter Nikolaus Otto; you remember the ottomobile!
                                                       FLOW SYSTEM E.NERGETICS     143



                      Combustion




p
                                             opens


                                             lntake
      11~.....,~.;;..;,~.,;.;;.._.,.,,...,   closes
    i---t----"'---'------+---.,;;-
       u                                u
       o                 V              o
       I-                               cO

FIG. 4.31     PRESSURE           CYLINDER-VOLUME      DIAGRAM   FOR A   SPARK-IGNITION
ENGINE.


molecules, and this pressure pushes the piston downward in the expansion
stroke. The exhaust valve opens shortly before BDC is reached and remains
open through the exhaust stroke, which returns the piston to TDC to
complete the four-stroke cycle.
   The work delivered to the piston on each stroke is determined by the
p"ressure and piston displacements, and if you think carefully about it,
you will realize that the work on the piston during the cycle is just the net
area under the pressure-volume curve ofFig. 4.31, with the area marked
"+" taken as positive and the area marked " - " taken as negative. The
negative area is called the "pump loop" and represents the work that
must be clone to suck the flow in and push the flow out of the engine. If
the spark fires too late, the positive area will be decreased and the power
output of the engine will fall. Conversely, if the pump loop increases in
area, the power output will also decrease. This is in fact the way that the
power output is controlled. When you "step on the gas," you actually
open up a throttle valve in the carburetor, which makes it easier for the
engine to suck in the air (you really "step on the air"). The pressure at
the intake valve is increased, and this increases the density of the fluid
taken into the cylinder. The fuel flow is also increased, but the ratio of
fuel to air stays about 'the same; the main change is in the density of the
fuel-air mixture. Thus, the size of the positive area is not changed much
as the load is varied, but the size of the pump loop changes markedly.
The part-load efficiency of a spark-ignition enginè will therefore be
lowered by the throttling irreversibility, which is one reason why cars
get fewer miles per gallon in the city than on a highway.
   The poor part-load performance of spark-ignition engines makes them
unpopular with truckers, construction companies, etc., for their vehicles
144 ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN



   A. Fuel
   J   injedion
   !




FIG. 4.32    PROCESSES IN THE CYLINDER OF A DIESEL ENGINE.


operate mainly at part load. They favor the diesel engine, which operates
orr a different cycle (Fig. 4.32). Air (no fuel) is sucked into the engine
during the intake stroke, and squeezed on the compression stroke to•a
high pressure (perhaps 15 atmospheres). This greatly increases the air
temperature. Fuel is then squirted into the cylinder through an "injector"
and immediately begins to burn in the hot air. The burning and injection
continue as the cylinder volume expands, and this tends to maintain high
pressure during the power stroke. The fuel injection is terminated at a
point determined by the engine load; the exhaust valve opens, and the
products of combustion are pushed out, through a good muffier, we hope
(and maybe someday through air-pollution-control equipment). The
ability to control the air-fuel ratio gives the diesel engine better part-load
performance, but the need for high pressures (to produce the high
temperatures needed for ignition without a spark) means that the engine
head and block must be thick and heavy. This weight is the main reason
why diesel engines are not found in many automobiles.
    If you are a racing fan, you may have heard of "superchargers."
These are small centrifuga! compressors that are used to increase the
density of air before it enters a spark-ignition or diesel engine. These
devices take power from the engine shaft, and do not improve the engine
efficiency. However, since more flow is being handled, the power output
of the engine can be increased, perhaps as much as 30%, with only a
slight weight penalty. Ifyou look at the diesel-engine pressures (Fig. 4.32),
you see that there is still a rather high pressure in the cylinder when
the exhaust valve opens. "Turbochargers" take advantage of this; the
exhaust gas is fed through a small turbine, and the power output of the
                                           FLOW SYSTEM ENER<3ETICS     145




                                              Expanding
                                              gases
       lntake                  Compression                  Power
FIG. 4.33   WANKEL-ENGINE SCHEMATIC.


turbine is used to drive a supercharger. In this case the efficiency is
improved because the supercharger power is obtained "for free." Turbo-
charged diesel engines are now quite common on large construction
equipment; these engines are also used to generate small amounts of
electrical power (perhaps a few hundred kw) in industria! applications,
emergency generators for hospitals, and a variety of other stationary
applications.
    A new type of spark-ignition engine appeared in the automotive world
not long ago. The Wankel "rotary" engine (Fig. 4.33) uses a triangular-
shaped eccentric rotor instead of conventional pistons, connecting rods,
crankshafts, etc. The Wankel engine operates with intake and exhaust
ports that are permanently open. As in the conventional spark-ignition
engine, the intake fuel-air mixture is compressed before the spark is
fired to ignite the fuel. The high pressures produced by the combustion
exert a torque on the eccentric rotor and push the rotor around, exposing
the exhaust port. Some of the fuel remains unburned, as in the conven-
tional piston engine, and there is more rumor than truth in the notion
that Wankel engines are "low-pollutant" engines. Its small relative size
gives more room under the hood for emission clean-up devices, and this is
a very strong plus for the rotary engine. But the main advantage of
rotary engines is their simplicity, and it is almost certain that they will
become more widely used as their technology develops.
    The basic performance parameters that are important in considering
engines for vehicular use are the power output per unit of weight, the
fuel consumption per horsepower-hour, the efficiency (power output/fuel
energy input), and the cost per horsepower of output. Values of these
parameters for typical engines are given in Table 4.4.
146      ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN




Table 4.4
Nominai Performance Parameter of Engines in the Range of a Few Hundred
Horsepower

                                        Specific fuel                    Engine
                     Specific weight,   consumption,       Efficiency,   specific cost,
Engine               lbf/hp             lbm fuel/hp-hr     %             $/hp

Spark-ignition
  (piston)           4                  0.4                27            3

Spark-ignition
  (rotary)           2                  0.4                30            4

Diesel               5                  0.45               32            4

Gas turbine
  (regenerative)     2.5                0.5                30            5



PROBLEMS

To develop your skill with numbers

 4.1     A household "through-ftow" water-heating system heats water only as it is
         used. The water enters the heater pipe at 60°F. The heater power is
         adjusted automatically to give the desired outftow temperature; the maxi-
         mum heater power is 10 kw. What is the maximum water ftow (lbm/hr)
         that can be heated to 150°F?

 4.2     A water tank contains 20 ft 3 ofwater at 70°F. A 20-kw electric immersion
         heater is used to heat the water to 140°F. How long does this take?

 4.3     A house contains 15,000 ft 3 of air at a chilly 40°F. When the fornace is
         turned on, the heater puts energy into the air (circulated through the heater)
         at the rate of 100,000 Btu/hr. Assuming that all the ençrgy remains in the
         air, how long does it take to warm the air to a comfortable 70°F?

 4.4     A 20 lbm chunk ofsteel (cv = 0.1 Btu/lbm- 0 R) is heated to 250°F, and then
         dumped into a pail containing 100 lbm of water at 60°F. This cools the
         steel and warms the water. Assuming that no energy "leaks" out of the
         pail, what is the fìnal system temperature?

 4.5     A 10-kw heater is used to heat each of the following from 50 to 200°F.
         How long does each process take?


            (a) 1 ft 3 of water (p = 62.4 lbm/ft 3 )
            (b) 1 ft 3 of air at 1 atm (volume held constant)
            (c) 1 ft 3 of concrete (p = 100 lbm/ft 3 , cv = 0.2 Btu/lbm-0 R)
                                                     FLOW SYSTEM EN'ERGETJCS           147



 4.6    What is the final pressure ofthe air in Prob. 4.5b?
 4. 7   The pressure of the atmosphere at an elevation of 10,000 ft is only about
        10 psia. At what temperature does water boil at this elevation?
 4.8    A room has the dimensions I Oft X 20 ft X 8 ft. How many !hm of air are in
        the rciom when the temperature is 70°F?
 4.9    Air in a piston-cylinder system is compressed to half its volume in a
        constant-pressure process. The initial volume is 0.5 ft 3 , and the initial
        temperature and pressure are 500°R and 30 psia, respectively. The final
        temperature is 5 l0°F. Calculate the amount of energy transfer as heat to or
        from the air for this process.


A toughie for those who dare

4.10 A large air piston system is proposed as a means for lifting heavy loads in a
        warehouse. The system is shown in the figure. The cylinder diameter is
        10 ft, the initial length L is 2 ft, and the final Iength L is 12 ft. Air at 15 psia
        and 60°F is put into the cylinder. The air is then heated unti! the pressure
        reaches 30 psia, at which the piston floats off the lower stops. The heating
        continues, and the piston moves up slowly. The pressure remains essentially
        constant during this lifting process. When the piston comes against the
        upper stops, the heating is terminated and the load removed. The air is
        then cooled by passing water through the cooling tubes unti! the pressure
        drops to 18 psia, at which the piston starts to move down. The piston
        reaches the bottom of its trave!, and then the cooling continues until the air
        temperature is returned at 60°F. Calculate the weight of the piston, the
        weight of the load, the work clone by the piston on the load, the work clone
        by the air on the piston for each part of the process, the amounts of energy
        transfer as heat for each part ofthe process, and the cycle efliciency (useful
        work output/heat-energy input). Hint: If you don't draw the process
        representation to get your thinking started and if you aren't careful in your
        definition of the system, you probably will go mad.




        Cooling
        tu bes
148 ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN


Some more interesting analyses
4.11   A 300-Mw power plant is to be located on a river where the water volume
       flow averages 800 ft 3 /sec. A nearly extinct species of fish live in the river;
       biologists report that these fish will die ifthe water temperature is increased
       by more than l0°F by the power plant "waste heat" rejection.
       Estimate the temperature rise; if there is a problem, discuss possible alter-
       natives; ifthere is not, discuss the simplifications used in your analysis that
       might be too optimistic for tbe fisb, and if possible improve your estimate.
       Is it wortbwhile to worry about the fisb at all?

4.12 A small lake covers 1 square mile witb an average deptb of 10 ft. A 1,000-
     Mw nearlzy power station is baving trouble witb its cooling towers, and
     wants to use tbe water in tbe lake for cooling during a 48-br period in wbicb
     tbey will repair tbe cooling towers. A conservationist group opposes tbe
     plan on tbe grounds tbat tbe beating of tbe lake water would kill a rare
     species offisb tbat live only in tbis lake; a biologist estimates tbat 75% oftbe
     fisb would survive a 5°F increase in tbe water temperature. Analyze tbis
     problem quantitatively to decide if there is a real danger to tbe fisb.
     Estimate the dollar loss to the utility company if tbey are forced to sbut
     down tbe power station during tbe cooling-tower repairs. Discuss tbè
     situation. Is tbe conservationists' problem real or imagined? What values
     are in conflict? How migbt tbe situation be resolved? Wbat would you do if
     you were the utility company president? What compromises migbt be
     sougbt?
4.13   It takes about 144 Btu to melt 1 lbm of ice. Suppose tbat all tbe "waste
       heat" rejected into the atmospbere by United States power plants eventually
       goes to melting polar ice. Estimate tbe amount of ice tbat is melted eacb
       year and tbe annual increase in ocean depth. Discuss tbe implications of
       your numbers.
4.14 In order to ease the tbermal-pollution problem, it is proposed tbat power
     plants reject beat by nighttime radiation to deep space. Nuclear energy
     migbt be used as the beat source, and tbe "waste heat" would be put into
     lake water during tbe day. Tbe lake water would tben be pumped tbrougb
     the radiators at nigbt. Suppose 100 Btu/hr could be rejected from each
     square foot during tbe 12-br nigbttime period. Estimate tbe radiator surface
     area required for a 1,000-Mw plant. Discuss tbe social, economie, and
     politica! problems that would emerge in discussions of this proposal.
4.15 A proposed scheme for generation of electrical energy involves exploding
     a nuclear bomb underground to create a large reservoir of bot, bigh-
     pressure steam. Tbe steam would tben be mined for use in a once-througb
     steam power plant, condensed, and then returned to an expired cavity for
     storage. A bomb of a few "megatons" would release of tbe order of 1013
     watt-bours. Perbaps half of this tbermal energy could be captured by the
     power plant, and tbe power plant eflìciency would be about 25%. How
                                                 FLOW SYSTEM ENERGETICS         149


       often would a l,000-Mw power plant have to be "refueled"? Discuss the
       technical rationality of this proposal, and the social, politica!, and. human
       values that bear on the proposal.


For your independent evaluation

4.16   Read the articles below on solar energy technology, and write a brief
       account of the state-of-the-art. Discuss the incentives for development of
       this technology; when do you think we could reach the point where half
       of our electrical energy is produced from solar sources?

          (a)   Solar Energy Progress, Mechanical Engineering, July 1970, p. 28
          (b)   Solar Powered Refrigeration, Mechanical Engineering, ]une 1971,
                p.22
          (e)   Power in the Year 2001, Part 3, Solar Power, Mechanical Engineering,
                November 1971, p. 33
          (d)   Solar SeaPower, Physics Today,January 1973, p. 48
4.17   Read one of the following articles, and write a brief description of the
       system in your own language. Discuss the technological development that is
       required, and the values questions that impact on this technology.

          (a)   Air Storage Power Plant, Mechanical Engineering, November 1970,
                p.29
          (b)   Combined Helium and Steam Cycle for Nuclear Power Plants,
                Mechanical Engineering, August l 97 l, p. 14
          (e)   Power in the Year 2001, Part 2, Thermal Sea Power, Mechanical
                Engineering, October 1971, p. 21
          (d)   Solar Sea Power, Physics Today,January 1973, p. 48

4.18   The systems described in the following articles have been developed to a
       considerable degree. Read these papers, and then discuss the relative
       outlook for future development of each.

          (a)   The Gas Turbine-Its Growth in the Electric Utility lndustry,
                Mechanical Engineering, October 1970, p. 34
          (b)   Russia's 1000 Mw Gas Turbine, Mechanical Engineering, December
                1970, p. 26
          (e)   Geothermal Power, Scientifìc American, January 1972, p. 70
          (d)   Steam Turbines, Scientifìc American, April 1969, p. 100
          (e)   Gas Turbines: An lndustry with Worldwide Impact, Mechanical
                Engineering, March l 973, p. 33

4.19   The articles below describe old and new technologies applicable in thermal
       systems. Read these, and then discuss the ways in which the technology of
       each is likely to move ahead and the possible impact of each upon power
       systems.
150    ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN




          (a)   Cooling Towers, Scientific American, May 1971, p. 70
          (b)   The Heat Pipe, Scientific American, May 1968, p. 38
          (e)   Rotary Engines, Scientific American, February 1969, p. 90
          (d)   The Stirling Refrigeration Cycle, Scientific American, Aprii 1965,
                p. 119
4.20 Read the following articles describing some of the history of internal-
     combustion engines. What values were operative for the early developers
     ofthis technology? What other values are important today as motivation for
     continued development of this technology? Write a short paper treating
     the impact of the technology and values of the early pioneers on our present
     society.
          (a)   The Origin of the Automobile Engine, Scientific American, March
                1967, p. 102
          (b)   Rudolph Diesel and His Rational Engine, Scientific American,
                August 1969, p. 108


Translating down and up

4.21   Look through some recent issues of Mechanical Engineering. Pick an article •
       that deals with a fluid energy system that interests you, and write a brief
       article about the system that would explain it simply to a class of high-school
       science students.

4.22   Look through some recent issues of Scientific American. Find an article dealing
       with a fluid energy system. Write a brief description of how the system
       works, using the terminology and approach presented here and expanding
       on what was discussed in the article.
MAKING CHEMICAL
     BONDSWORK


        In which we tap the energy
          of molecular marriages




MOLECULAR STRUCTURE ANO CHANGE

Many important energy technologies involve chemical changes of some
sort. Y our understanding of these technologies will be greatly enhanced
if you can develop a little understanding of the microscopie structure of
matter. Physicists are today engaged in an exciting game of detective
work trying to discover the truly fundamental particles of nature and to
organize this information in some coherent way. Just as the universe has
galaxies, solar systems, planets, and moons, matter appears to have many
echelons of organization. The ~argest building block of matter that we
call "microscopie" is the "molecule"; molecules in turn are collections

                                                                     151
152    ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN




of "atoms"; atoms in turnare built up from electrons, protons, and neu-
trons. And in turn these are built up from ... well, this is what the
physicists are trying to decide today. In spite of the fact that physicists
do not yet fully understand the fundamental particles of matter, what is
known does provide a rather good picture of atoms and molecules, the
way that atoms combine to make molecules, and the way that molecules
interact to form other molecules. The science of all this is called "chem-
istry"; it is one of the fundamental tools used by engineers in the design
of many sorts of energy systems. This chapter provides a brief introduction
to some aspects of chemistry, with applications to a variety of energy
systems. Our objective is not to make you an overnight chemist, but
rather to acquaint you with the basic ideas and terminology, and the
way that they are used in engineering analysis of energy systems.
     Let's start with one of the useful models for atoms; you probably know
that atoms have a center called the "nucleus" around which tiny things
called "electrons" whirl and swirl something like planets around the sun. *
An electron has a property called "negative electric charge" that we will
learn more about in the next chapter. The nucleus (atom center) is com,.
 posed of tightly packed particles called "protons" and "neutrons." Each
proton has a "positive electric charge" equal in magnitude to the electric
charge of an electron; neutrons have no electric charge. Each atom con-
tains the same number of protons as electrons, and thus the total electric
charge of any atom is zero. Since electric charges of the same sign repel
one another, and electric charges of opposite sign attract one another,
the negatively charged electrons are pushed away from one another
 and pulled toward the positively charged protons in the nucleus. Only
 their kinetic energy prevents them from falling into the nucleus. The
 protons in the nucleus, all being similarly charged, tend to push away
from one another. The fact that they remain tightly clu~tered in spite
 of the powerful repulsive electric forces between them indicates that there
 must be even stronger cohesive forces in the nucleus. These stronger
 forces give rise to nuclear energy, which we shall discuss in Chap. 7.
 The masses of the individua! particles in an atom are

      Electron   9.1083 x 10- 31 kg
      Proton     1.67239 x 10- 2 7 kg
      Neutron     1.67470 x 10- 27 kg

* Planets orbit on a piane; electrons apparently change their orbitai piane continuously,
and thus wander randomly about on a sphere.
                                        MAKING CHEMICAL BONDS WORK        153



Note that the proton and neutron have about the same mass, and that the
mass of the electron is much less. Figure 5.1 shows some representations
of a few important atoms.
    Atoms are differentiated by the number of electrons. The electron
orbits appear to be grouped in "shells," each of which can contain a
particular maximum number of electrons. The inner shells are filled in
more complex atoms, but the outer shells may or may not be filled to
capacity. For example, each carbon atom contains six electrons (two
filling the inner shell, and four in the second shell) having a tota! electric
charge - 6e (the symbol e denotes the magnitude of the electric charge of an




                                  (b)




                         (e)
FIG. 6.1 SCHEMATICS OF THREE
IMPORTANT ATOMS. p PROTON.
 n NEUTRON, - ELECTRON.
(a) HYDROGEN ATOM. (b) OXYGEN
ATOM. (e) CARBON ATOM.
154   ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN




electron) and six protons with a total electric charge of +6e, giving a
total charge of - 6e + 6e = Oe. The carbon nucleus also has six neutrons.
The atoms are ordered according to the number of electrons (or protons) ;
this is called the "atomic number" and is usually denoted by Z.
   The letters are only part of the chemical designation of the elements.
Frequently fore-subscripts and aft-superscripts are also used. For example,

          1
              H1

In each case the letter identifies the element, the fore-subscript is the
atomic number (number of electrons or protons), and the aft-superscript
is the total number of particles in the nucleus (protons plus neutrons).
All carbon atoms have six electrons, and so the fore-subscript is really
redundant to the letter. However, physicists like to use the fore-subscript
as a check in electron counting, so you will see it included sometimes and
left out others. Did you notice that 1 H 1 and 1 H 2 are both some form of
hydrogen? We'll discuss this shortly.
    Each atom has a mass determined by its composition. A special mas~
scale called the "atomic weight" is used to compare atoms; on this scale
the carbon atom 6 C 12 by definition has an atomic weight of exactly
12 amu ("atomic mass units"). Mercury atoms have an average atomic
weight of200.6l, and hence a mass 200.61/12 = 16.72 times that ofthe
6 C 12 atom.
    Atoms combine to form "molecules," assemblies of two or more atoms.
The electrons in the outer shell of each atom are "shared" by the atoms;
you can think of these shared electrons as orbiting around all the atomic
nuclei in the molecule, as shown in Fig. 5.2, and this is the "glue" that
holds the molecule together. The energy associated with this glue is
called the "chemical bond" or "binding" energy. The binding energy
depends upon the atoms that are joined and the way that they share
electrons. Chemical reactions occur when atoms combine to form mol-
ecules or when molecules combine to form other molecules. Atoms that
have outer shells filled to capacity with electrons have no room to spare
and hence are unable to combine to form molecules; these are the "inert"
elements helim, neon, argon, krypton, xenon, and radon.
    Molecules also are electrically neutral; i.e., they contain the same
number of protons as electrons. Sometimes atoms or molecules lose or
gain one or more electrons, and then of course they have a net positive
or negative electrical charge. In such a state they are called "ions."
Since particles with a charge can be pushed about by electric fields, as
we will discuss in Chap. 6, ions can be pushed about by voltages. This
                                     MAKING CHEMICAL .BONDS WORK        155




                                         /




                                      '°~-Electrons in the
                                             outermost shel!
                                             are shared by
                                             the nuclei
FIG. 5.2   THE IDEA OF MOLECULAR GLUE.


 behavior is basic to electrostatic precipitators, an important type of
 air-pollution-control device. Conversely, if ions are carried by material,
 they in effect form an electric current, and this too has many practical
applica tions.
    W e mentioned earlier that there is more than one kind of hydrogen
atom. Atoms that contain the same number of protons but different
numbers of neutrons are called "isotopes" of the same element. Since
only the charged particles are involved in gluing atoms into molecules,
the number of neutrons (remember that neutron particles have no
electrical charge) does not matter as far as chemistry is concerned, and
hence the isotopes of a given element all have the same chemistry. In
nature there is a fixed percentage of each isotope of each element, and the
a tomie weights tabulated in "periodic tables of the elements" refer to the
average as found on earth. For example, the atomic weight of uranium
is 237.9. The isotope of interest in nuclear reactors is 92 U 238 ;. natural
uranium is mostly 92 U 2 3 5 . Figure 5.3 shows the isotopes of hydrogen
pictorially. Physicists have created many different isotopes of every




FIG. 5.3   ISOTOPES OF HYDROGEN.
156   ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN




substance; most of these isotopes do not last for very long but change to
more common isotopes by processes of radioactive decay. We'll learn
more about this in Chap. 7.
   Molecules are represented symbolically in terms of the atoms that
are in them. For example, the symbols C and O stand for "carbon" and
"oxygen," respectively, and CO represents the "carbon monoxide"
molecule (one carbon atom and one oxygen atom), that poisonous
product of internal-combustion engines. And C0 2 represents "carbon
dioxide" (one carbon atom and two oxygen atoms), the gas that plants
breathe. Normally just the letters are used, and aft-subscripts are used to
denote the number of atoms of each type in the molecule.
   Atoms sometimes gain or lose one or more electrons, and then they are
called "ions." Ions are represented by letter symbols with superscripts
that show the charge. For example, Ag+ represents an ion ofsilver having
a charge of +le (one electron is absent),    r represents an ion of iodine
with charge -le (one electron added), and Al+++ is an aluminum ion
with charge +3e (with three electrons missing).
   Chemists write chemical equations using these symbols. For example, •

                                                                        (5.1)

is an equation for the reaction of methane (CH4 ) with oxygen (0 2 ). The
methane molecule consists of one carbon atom and four hydrogen atoms,
and the oxygen molecule consists of two oxygen atoms. One CH4 molecule
and two 0 2 molecules react to form two molecules of water (H 2 0) and
one molecule of C0 2 • Note that there are the same number of C atoms
(one) on both sides ofthe equation, the same number ofO atoms (four)
on both sides, and the same number of hydrogen atoms (four) on both
sides. Chemical equations always must be consistent with tpe principle
of "conservation of atoms,'' which says that in the absence of nuclear
reactions (Chap. 7) atoms cannot be created or destroyed.
    Chemists sometimes interpret equations like (5.1) in another way.
They use a materia! unit called the "mole,'' which is a mass numerically
equal to the atomic weight. For example, one "gram mole" (often
abbreviated gmole or just plain mole) of C 1 2 will be 12 grams. If you think
about it, you will see that Eq. (5.1) can be interpreted as saying that one
gmole of CH 4 reacts with two gmoles of 0 2 to form two gmoles of H 2 0
and one gmole of C0 2 . This is because the "atomic weight" is really a
self-consistent mass measure for the various atoms. Sometimes the term
"lbmole" (pound-mole) is used; this is a mass in lbm numerically equal
to the atomic weight. Equation (5.1) can be interpreted as one lbmole
of CH 4 reacting with two lbmoles of 0 2 to form two lbmole of H 2 0 and
                                           MAKING CHEMICAL BONDS WORK               157



one lbmole of C02 • Chemists are fond of the mole, and will often state
the amount of chemical involved in some process in terms of moles
(usually meaning gram moles). In Eq. (5.1) there happens to be three
moles on both sides of the equation. But there are other reactions in
which 'the number of moles change; Eq. (5.3) is an important example.
   Some chemical reactions result in formation of ions. For example,

                                                                                   (5.2)

describes the ionization reaction of silver, in which a silver atom (Ag)
loses an electron (e-) in forming the silver ion (Ag+).
   There are jillions of possible chemical reactions; perhaps you were
discouraged about chemistry at some early age by the thought of having
to memorize all nature's possible reactions. But there is a science to
chemical reactions, and the trained chemist can forecast all the possible
reactions between given chemicals using some fundamental ideas like
energy, entropy, and conservation of charge. So, it is not really such a big
mystery after all.                                                                          •

REACTION THERMODVNAMICS

   Let's now consider the energetics of chemical reaction. Suppose we
dump some hydrogen and oxygen into a tank and allow them to react
to form water. The chemical equation is

                                                                                   (5.3)

This says that two molecules of hydrogen will react with one molecule of
oxygen to form two molecules of water.* Recall that the "bonding eRergy"
is the energy associated with the glue (shared electrons) that hold a
molecule together. Now, the bonding energy of the two H 2 molecules
plus the bonding energy of the 0 2 molecule is more than the bonding
energy of the two water molecules. So, when the reaction occurs, this
eJ{tra energy is "released" and goes to some other form. In combustion
reactions this extra bonding energy is immediately converted into dis-
organized translational, rotational, and vibrational molecular energy
(i.e., internal energy); if the reaction chamber is rigid and insulated, so
that none of the energy can escape as work or beat, the result is a dramatic
increase in the temperature ofthe gas in the chamber. This conversion of

• Note that the left side has three moles and the right side only two. Mass is conserved,
but mo/al mass is not.
                                                                                                  --~




158    ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN




                              I 'weight i '
--+--- ,                      I                            li                         ~
   t        h.:. -':"' .:...-·.-::_-111- -- . ;-i~.i~_-_-~:·;~~;:;_·:_~~~~-~-·::.;_'._·

   Ii li~!
X i.
      ::
           E:?!~,I
                 c:~
            ·r............... ,    Au Q .!              __ ,
                     .:-.e·::,.-·-·· _____ JL.. :·:----·.:._::...

------ l=2~;~~25~~~~.~,;.:~~:~J
                               "·-Constant-temperature bath
FIG. 6.4         REACTIONS CAN BE HELD AT CONSTANT PRESSURE AND TEMPERATURE.



chemical bonding energy to internal energy is sometimes loosely. called
"chemical heating."
    In principle it is possible to maintain fixed values for both the temper-
ature and the pressure of the gases during a combustion reaction. W&
can imagine using a piston-cylinder system as the reaction chamber, and
allowing the piston to move to maintain a fixed pressure in the cylinder.
Then, we imagine cooling the mixture to maintain the contents at a fixed
temperature. Information about chemical reactions is usually given for
this hypothetical reaction at a particular set of temperature and pressures
(usually 1 atmosphere and 298°K). Let's look at the energy balance .to
see what information can be supplied (Fig. 5.4). We allow the reaction
to occur and simultaneously do the expansion and cooling required to
maintain fixed temperature and pressure. The energy balance on the
reaction chamber is

       O      =             AU                    + Q+w                                   (5.4)
   energy           change in                             energy output
   input            energy storage


Here U represents the total internal energy of the stuff in the cylinder,
including the chemical bonding energies of whatever molecules are there.
The work term is expressible in terms of the pressure P, piston area A,
and piston displacement Ax; the force is P A; so the work is

   W = PA Ax

Since the cylinder volume is simply AX, this is equivalent to
                                         MAKING CHEMICAL BONDS WORK      159



where Vis the volume of the cylinder. But since the pressure is constant,
this is also the same as

   W = A(PV)                                                           (5.5)

Substituting Eq. (5.5) into Eq. (5.4), and solving for Q,

   Q = -AU - A(PV) = -A(U + PV)

Q could be either positive or negative, depending on the change in
U + PV. Now, we define the "total enthalpy" of the contents of the
cylinder by

   H = U + PV                                                          (5.6)

So, the amount ofheat that must be removed to maintain the temperature
and pressure constant is

   Q=    - AH =    - (Htinal -   Hinitia1)                             (5.7)

The initial condition has hydrogen and oxygen in the cylinder; these are
called the "reactants." The final condition has just water in the cylinder;
this is called the "product" ofthe reaction. When chemists want to indicate
that the reaction has been carried out at the "standard reference con-
ditions" of 1 atm and 298°K, they use a little superscript zero. So, for a
constant-temperature-constant-pressure reaction at the standard reference
conditions, they would write

                                                                       ~5.8)


The quantity AH 0 , which is the change in the enthalpy that occurs when
the reaction takes place at the standard reference conditions, is called the
"enthalpy of combustion." The negative of AH 0 , which from Eq. (5.8)
is the same as Q, is called the "heat offormation" or the "heat ofreaction."
Values of AH 0 for thousands of reactions have been measured or worked
out from theory andare tabulated in reference books like the "Handbook
of Chemistry and Physics." Sometimes they are given for one mole of
fuel (in this case H 2 ) and sometimes for one mole ofreactants (in this case
j-H 2 + !02 ); sometimes + !J.H 0 is tabulated and other times - !J.H 0 is
tabulated; so one must read the table captions carefully.
    In reference books on chemical properties one finds tables giving
chemical thermodynamic properties of various compounds. Included
 160   ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN




 in these tabulations are the "enthalpy of formation" or "heat of formation"
 (AH 0 or Q), which referto simple chemical reactions in which the com-
 pound is formed from its basic elements. For example, the enthalpy of
 formation of H 2 0 (gaseous water) is listed in the "Handbook of Chem-
 istry and Physics" as AH 0 = -57.8 x 10 3 cal/gmole, and the heat of
 formation is given as Q = +57.8 x 10 3 cal/gmole [check Eq. (5.8)].
 Also given in these tables is the specific entropy of the compound at the
 standard reference state (1 atm, 298°K), denoted by S 0 ; for H 2 0 (vapor)
 S 0 = 45.11 cal/gmole-°K. The table lists another quantity called the
 "free energy" of formation AG 0 , which is defined by

    AG 0 = (H - TS)products - (H - TS)reactants                         (5.9)

 If you recall the relationship between the entropy change, absolute
 temperature, and energy transfer as heat for a reversible process
 [Eq. (3.14)] and use this in Eq. (5.4), you can show that the work clone
 during the constant-pressure-constant-temperature reaction is

    W = -AG 0

  So -AG 0 represents the maximum energy that could be derived as work
  as a result of the chemical reaction. For water - AG 0 = 54.64 cal/gmole.
  The "fuel cell," which we will discuss shortly, is a device that attempts to
  capture this available ("free") energy.
     Let's now suppose we dump a bunch of chemicals into an insulated
  constant-volume pot, allow them to react to form other chemicals, and
  then want to know the composition of the final mess. For example, if
  we use methane (CH4 ) and air (mainly 0 2 and N 2 ), mapy different
  types of molecules will be formed, including H 2 0, C0 2 , CO, N0 2 , NO,
  and some 0 2 , N 2 , and CH4 may remain. Can you guess what scientific
  principles are used to calculate how much of each chemical will appear
  in the final mixture? Certainly conservation of atomic species is required;
  we have O, N, C, and H atoms; so this gives us four equations. The energy
. balance is a fifth equation. But we have many more unknowns (the final
  temperature, pressure, and the amount of each chemical present in the
  mixture, at least nine as given above). Obviously more information is
  needed, and this is provided by the second law of thermodynamics. If
  the reaction chamber is insulated and of fixed volume, so that no energy
  can leave the system as heat or work, the second law requires that the
  entropy can't go down. So, as reactions occur and change the mixture
  composition, each reaction can only increase the entropy. The final
  equilibrium condition will have to be the state of largest possible entropy.
                                     MAKING CHEMICAL .BONDS WORK         161



The physical chemist or chemical engineer who wants to calculate the
final mixture plays a mathematical game in which one adjusts the
temperature, pressure, and assumed composition of the mixture, each
time being sure that atoms and energy are conserved; one must-calculate
the entropy of each trial mixture until the mixture with the largest
possible entropy has been found. This last solution gives the equilibrium
composition. The "equilibrium constant'' that you may see in tables of
chemical thermodynamic properties is a tool that helps in this sort of
calculation. Nowadays such calculations are clone swiftly and routinely
by computers, and such calculations are an important part of the
engineering analysis behind any combustion system.


COMBUSTION TECHNOLOGY

    The reaction process just described was a quite hypothetical "batch"
process. More often one is interested in reactions in a steady-state system.
For example, in combustion chambers air and fuel flow continuously in,
the reaction occurs as the flow goes along, and the hot products of com-
bustion continuously flow out. Figure 5.5 shows a schematic ofthis process.
It is usually reasonable to assume that there is no energy transfer as heat
from the chamber and that the process occurs at constant pressure.
Hence, the energy balance on the contro! volume shown is




where the M terms are the mass flow rates (e.g., grams/sec) and the h
terms are the enthalpies (e.g., cal/gram). The enthalpy of the products
depends upon the composition of the exhaust gases (the amounts of
H 2 0, C0 2 , etc.); thus, a second-law analysis must be involved in.the cal-
culation of the composition and temperature of the product gases. Since
the combustion chamber is insulated, there is no energy transfer as heat.
Such a process is called "adiabatic," and the product temperature is
called the "adiabatic flame temperature." The combustion-chamber
engineer must be sure to prescribe the proper air and fuel flows to give the
desired adiabatic flame temperature, and thermodynamics is the science.
that he uses to make this calculation.


Air


Ft1el


FIG. 5.5   AN ADIABATIC COMBUSTION CHAMBER.
162   ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN




    The adiabatic flame temperature can be controlled by adjusting the
air/fuel ratio. The mixture that supplies just the proper amount of
oxygen to combust all the fuel is termed "stoichiometric." If there is a
surplus of oxygen, the mixture is "lean," and if there is a surplus of fuel,
the mixture is "rich." Internal-combustion engines tend to operate slightly
rich, and so not all the fuel is combusted; this gives rise to air pollution
by "unburned hydrocarbons." In contrast, gas-turbine engines operate
quite lean, and hence present practically no problems with unburned
hydrocarbons. The highest adiabatic ftame temperatures are produced
with nearly stoichiometric mixtures, and so the lean-running gas turbine
operates with a much cooler flame temperature.
    The equilibrium composition of the combustion products depends on
the air/fuel ratio, which also regulates the adiabatic ftame temperature.
At high temperatures molecules tend to "dissociate" (break down into
individua} atoms), and at still higher temperatures the atoms tend to
ionize, thereby making the gas capable of conducting electricity. This
has important applications in magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) power
generators, as we shall discuss in the next chapter. Figure 5.6 shows the
adiabatic ftame temperature and equilibrium mixture composition for
combustion ofmethane gas (CH4 ) with air. Note that the carbon monoxide
content increases dramatically with increased temperature. Thus, spark-
ignition engines tend to produce a large amount ofCO during combustion.
Eventually the product mixture is cooled down to ambient temperatures,
and thus you might think from Fig. 5.6 that the CO level would go down
as the gas cools. However, most of the cooling occurs rapidly in a "quench-
ing" process as the gas contacts the relatively cold cylinder walls. At low
temperatures the rate of approach to equilibrium is very slow, and so the
CO composition is essentially "frozen" by the quenching process at some-
thing dose to the equilibrium composition in the high-temperature ftame.
Automotive engineers have been working on this quenching problem for
some time, trying to allow the mixture to exist at moderate temperatures
for enough time for the CO fraction to "relax" back to the relatively low
levels that occur in equilibrium mixtures at moderate temperature before
the final quenching to ambient temperatures. Indeed, improved exhaust-
valve and manifold designs have led to reductions in the CO emissions
from spark-ignition engines, but they remain much worse in this respect
than the cooler-burning gas-turbine engines.
    The rich-running spark-ignition engine operates at about 15 lbm of air
per lbm of fuel, while in the leaner gas-turbine engine the air/fuel ratio
is more like 40/1. Now, air is about 80% nitrogen, which does not enter
into the reaction very much; so the combustion gases also contain mostly
nitrogen. In view of these factors, it is often assumed in engine-cycle
                                                  MAKING CHEMICAL B..ONDS WORK               163



         500           h(T)-h(298 °K)                                                ~ !
                                                . ····················~·-····-···--···-·

         500           for produds of                                               22'00
                                                                               i_,.,..-~
                       combustion                                            ~..
         400 i-        cal/grarn                  /                 1   _...)··2noo
               !            '             /,                t/~~--~.J·'" '
                                                                        ·"
         300 ~-                                 ~ , F_.- 180(!
              j                         ,,.,./""" _l,.--){600 _.--r CH4 cornbustìon
              ~                  --::-~'
         2.00 '--··-·····--.--.:::
                   i    .        ;
                                  . ____+ _ ~-""
                                          ·1
                                                 14GO T oK
                                                        /
                                                                    at 1 at m
                          rnoo 1200                      '1




                                                                                                   •


  e
  o
:.i:'.
  u
  ra
  L
4-
 I/)
 Il)
 (ti




                       1000     1200   1400 1600                1800         2000     2200
                                          T, OK
FIG. 5.6       PRODUCTS OF COMBUSTION FOR METHANE-AIR REACTION.


analysis that the working ftuid is nitrogen (or air) and that the combustion
process is simply a heat-transfer process that increases the energy of the
working ftuid. The amount of equivalent energy input as heat depends
upon the chemical bonding energy released by the combustion process,
which is very nearly the same as the heat of formation of the fuel. So,
164    ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN


                         .
                     /   Oequivalent
       _;___J--/""'"___,u~
Mair                                    FIG. 5.7   SIMPLIFIED COMBUSTOR
          I               1-            MODEL.


as a first approximation, the amount of fuel required can be computed
quite simply. For example, suppose we want to heat 10,000 lbm/hr of
air from 500 to 2000°R in a steady-flow combustion chamber (see Fig.
5. 7). The energy balance on the air is

                                                                     (5.10)

The enthalpy change of the air is related to the temperature change by
Eq. (4.5),



So,                                                                           •
                               10,000 lbm/hr x 0.24 Btu/lbm-°F (l
                                X   (2,000 - 500)°F   {J,   !
                             = 3.6 x 10 6 Btu/hr

Now, high-grade hydrocarbon fuels have heats of formation (or com-
bustion) in the neighborhood of 18,000 Btu/lbm of fuel. So, with the
approximation outlined above, the equivalent heating is



where we use Q1 to denote the heat of combustion. Then,

   Mfuel = !{ = 3.6 X 106 Btu/hr = 200 lbm/hr
              Q1    18,000 Btu/lbm

Thus the required fuel flow is 145 lbm/hr, which corresponds to an air/fuel
ratio of

   AF = 10,000 lbm air/200 lbm fuel = 50 lbm air/lbm fuel

This example shows the sort of simplified calculation that an engineer
would make in arder to establish a first estimate of the fuel requirements
                                      MAKING CHEMICAL BONDS WORK         165



in a particular system. Table 5.1 gives some values for the heat of com-
bustion for severa! fuels. These heats of combustion assume that the water
formed by the reaction is gaseous, andare therefore called "lower heating
values." The term "higher heating value" is used when the water is in
liquid form, the small difference (a few percent) representing the amount
of energy used in vaporizing the water in the products.


Table 5.1
Nominai Heats of Combustion of Selected Fuels

Fuel                Q. 1 ,Btu/lbm
Hydrogen            52,000
Methane             24,000
Gasoline            21,000
Kerosene            20,000
Oil                 18,000
Animai fats         17,000
Coal                12,000
Buckwheat hulls      7,500
Oak wood             7,000


    Steady-ftow combustion chambers, such as those used in boilers, gas-
turbine engines, rocket motors, and household water heaters, come in a
variety of designs. Burners using gaseous fuels usually mix the gas with
some air to forma mixture that can be ignited easily. The mixture ftows
to a "ftameholder," where it passes through the "ftame front" and into
the combustion zone of the ftame. The products of combustion leave
the ftame region and are mixed with additional air, which reduces the
temperature of the gases leaving the burner. Low-power burners, such
as gas stoves, usually operate with a "laminar" ftame, while in higher-
power units the ftame is purposely made "turbulent" to increase the
mixing and assist the combustion process. Burners that use liquid fuels
sometimes squirt the fuel directly into the combustion zone, and some-
times use heat drawn from the burner to vaporize the liquid before it
enters the combustion zone; camp-stove burners are of this type. Solid-
fuel burners generally draw the air along the burning fuel, and com-
bustion occurs in a ftame attached to the solid. Figure 5.8 shows a large
commercia! burner capable of handling either oil or gas, and Fig. 5.9
shows the combustion chamber from an aircraft gas-turbine engine.
   In rockets the oxidizer is not air but instead is some chemical that
can completely react with the fuel (no sense carting around nonreacting
stuff!). Oxygen, stored in the rocket in a liquid form, is often used. Solid-
propellant rockets have the fuel and oxidizer mixed together, and are
166   ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN




FIG. 5.8 INSTALLATION OF OIL/GAS BURNERS IN A LARGE UTILITY PLANT.
COURTESY OF THE BABCOCK ANO WILCOX CORPORATION.



shaped to produce a desirable pattern of burning and materiai removal
from the motor.
   In piston engines the combustion process is intermittent, and this
causes special problems. For rapid and well-controlled ignition the mixture
must be slightly rich, and this produces high ftame temperatures, as men-
tioned previously. Ideally the ftame initiates at the spark and propagates



 Fuel injector   Flame holder




                                      /                    Product gas
                            Holes for air [ntake
                                                           discharge

FIG. 5.9   CUTAWAY OF AN AIRCRAFT-ENGINE COMBUSTION CHAMBER.
                                     MAKING CHEMICAL BONDS WORK         167



across the cylinder at a steady rate. But if the combustible mi:xture is too
hot (remember it gets hot as it is compressed), spontaneous ignition
("detonation") will occur at other places in the cylinder; this sends out
uncontrolled flame fronts and shock waves, and produces undesirable
1ocal concentrations of high-pressure gases. This is the "pinging" or
"knocking" that occurs in high-compression engines when a low-grade
gasoline is used. The "octane" rating of a fuel is a measure of its ability
to resist spontaneous ignition; high-octane fuels contain certain additives,
and will make a high-compression engine run better. The energy released
by high-octane fuel is essentially the same as that released by low-octane
fuels; so it is a fabrication of the advertising agencies that "high-test"
fuels have "more power." Ifyour automobile engine runs without pinging
on low-octane fuels, you will have absolutely no gain by using a high-
octane fuel (except a larger gas-tax deduction for your income tax return).
   An important advance in internal-combustion engine technology is
the "straticharge engine" shown in Fig. 5.1 O. A conventional spark-
ignition engine is modified by the addition of a "precombustion chamber"
or "precup," which has its own supply of air and fuel and in which the
sparking occurs. The idea is to introduce a rich, easily combustible
mixture to the precup, ignite it, and then use the hot precup exhaust to
ignite a much leaner mixture that has been admitted separately to the
main cylinder. The overall effect is to permit the engine to operate
much leaner than conventional internal-combustion engines, with air
fuel ratios of the order of 25: I and as high as 40: I. This virtually

                                Precombustion
l.'diri '.::ylinder             chamber intake
                      Exhaust
intake                    I
                         I
                        1'              /?
                                        /Spark plu9



                                      Precombusf!on
                                      chamber




FIG. 5.10     THE STRATICHARGE ENGINE CONCEPT.
168      ENERGY: FROM .NATURE TO MAN




elirninates the problem with unburned hydrocarbons, drastically reduces
the amount of carbon monoxide in the exhaust, and facilitates treatment
of the oxides of nitrogen. The straticharge engine development is an
interesting story with significant implications. The ccncept has been
known for many years, and. is used routinely in diesel engines. In the
rnid l 950s, Ralph Heintz and Professor A. L. London of Stanford
University experimented with severa! straticharge engines of Heintz's
design. Professor London wrote severa! papers proclaiming the advantages
of straticharge engines as low-emission devices and pointing out the need
for further straticharge engine development. * The concept was not
pushed by U.S. automobile manufacturers, but Honda of Japan did
carry out a massive development activity, which by 1973 resulted in an
engine quite superior to anything that Detroit could offer. Licenses from
Ronda were taken by several U.S. manufacturers, and there was renewed
interest in the straticharge engines under study at Stanford University
(Fig. 5.11). In 1973 a study by a comrnittee of the National Academy of
Sciences again reached the conclusion that the diesel engine and the
straticharge engine were the best bets for clean internal-combustion•
engines, precisely the conclusions given by Professor London in his




FIG. 5.11 AN EXPERIMENTAL STRATICHARGE ENGINE UNDERGOING TESTS IN
THE MECHANICAL ENGINEERING LABORATORY AT STANFORD UNIVERSITY.


* Vehicle Smog Emissions, Archives for Environmental Health, voi. 6, May 1963, pp. 672-
  677.
                                         MAKING CHEMICAL BONDS WORK         169



pioneering paper ten years earlier, a paper that only Japanese industry
really appreciated !
    A number of new fuels are receiving attention today. A firm in Cal-
ifornia plans to produce electrical power by burning garbage, farmers
in China use gas collected from farm-animal excrement for household
cooking, and a British engineer runs his car on chicken droppings.
Thermodynamic data for these fuels are not as well known as for conven-
tional fuels, and the technology of their use needs to be developed; so
there are some interesting and novel paths for combustion engineers to
follow.


BATTERIES ANO FUEL CELLS

    A battery is a device for producing electrical energy from chemical
energy. The "voltaic celi" (Fig. 5.12) consists of copper and zinc plates
immersed in dilute sulfuric acid (the "electrolyte"). The electrolyte con-
tains positive and negative ions, in this case H 2 + + and S04 - - , but overall
is electrically neutra!. Zinc tends to dissolve in the electrolyte more easily
than does copper. In solution it forms the ion Zn + +, leaving electrons
behind on the zinc plate. This gives the zinc plate a negative charge with
respect to the copper plate, and so when an electric circuit is connected
to the terminals of the celi, the electrons want to move around to the
copper plate. Energy can then be extracted from the electrons in the
external circuit. The battery becomes "dead" when the electrolyte is
saturated with zinc, so that no more wants to dissolve. To revive the celi,
one just replaces the sulfuric acid; this can be continued so long as zinc
is present, but when the zinc is gone, the celi is permanently dead. The
chemical reactions in the cell produce hydrogen around the copper plate,




                                fa., Electron
                                I fiow




            Load
FIG. 5.12   THE VOLTAIC CELL.
170   ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN




and this must be removed for proper operation of the device. Another
type ofbattery is the "dry-cell," in which the electrolyte is a paste instead
of a liquid. The paste electrolyte and cell design are such that the electrol-
ysis that produces hydrogen on the copper in the voltaic cell is not a
problem.
    The batteries described above are "primary'' cells; they are stocked
up with chemicals. The amount of chemical energy available is deter-
mined by the amounts and choices of initial chemicals, and the batteries
are dead when the chemicals are used up. In contrast, the typical auto-
motive battery and the nickel-cadmium dry-cell batteries used in transistor
radios are rechargeable. The energy is put into the battery as electrical
energy, which causes a chemical reaction to occur. The energy is then
stored in the battery in chemical bonding energy, and is released upon
demand by connecting up the cell. In the automotive battery the plates
are lead and the electrolyte is dilute sulfuric acid. A layer of lead sulfate
forms on these plates. When the battery is charged, chemical reactions
occur that convert one set of plates to lead dioxide and the other to lead.
The lead and lead dioxide plates then function as do the copper and
zinc plates in the voltaic cell. The chemical energy stored in the plates is
reconverted to electrical energy, which is extracted by an external load,
and the plate surfaces are reconverted to lead sulfate.
    The voltage output of a voltaic cell depends upon the chemicals used
and not upon the size of the battery. The automotive-type lead-acid cell
has a voltage per cell of about 2 volts, while typical carbon-zinc dry cells
used in fl.ashlights have a voltage of about 1.5 volts. Of course, cells can
be connected in series to increase the total voltage if desired. The size of
the cell determines the amount of electric current that can fl.ow, i.e., the
total amount of energy that is available from a single discharge of the cell.
Strictly speaking, a "battery'' is a collection oftwo or more cel\s, although
the term is commonly used for single cells. The efficiency of modem
batteries, defined as the ratio of the electrical energy output to the avail-
able chemical energy, is around 75%. The theoretical efficiency for
reversible chemical reactions is, of course, 100%.
    Let's think for a moment about the performance characteristics of a
battery. Suppose we would like to have a battery pack that delivers a
given amount of energy. The energy capabilities of the battery only
depend only on its chemical composition. But what happens if we try
to withdraw this energy rapidly? The power capabilities of the battery
are limited by the ion-diffusion processes in the electrolyte; so, ifwe want
to get the energy out quickly, we will need to have a lot of plate surface
area, i.e., we will need to have a large battery ofbatteries. In other words,
the higher the power output that we demand, the more pounds ofbatteries
                                                                  MAKING CHEMICAL BONDS WORK                 171




       ·t·


                     ~
 e!
li j
:; i
 li. i
..µ     .




                                            \
 ::>
 o
 ~
~
        l-···-··--·---~-·-·-·-·-·-··-·····-·--·"·~--··-~-~·        FIG. 5.13 TYPICAL BATTERY
                  Energy storage/lbm                               CHARACTERISTICS.



we will need to be able to get a given amotÌnt of energy. Thus, the energy
delivered per lbm of battery will go down as the power output of each
lbm is increased. This means that batteries must have performance curves
of the form shown in Fig. 5.13; a battery can provide a small amount of
energy at high power, or a larger amount of energy at low power.
   There are many kinds of batteries, each with its own characteristics.
They are compared 011 a specific-power-specific-energy basis in Fig. 5.14.
The lead-acid battery is relatively well developed; it is rugged, efficient,
and fairly economical. But its low specific energy makes it unsuited to
                                                                                                        ~A_---~
       1000   t-----~--~------.-------------.
                  r;/.l ~ ' ( ' l ' d · '
                                              ---=i I.O
                                               ,,.:::}~
                                                                                                       ~r~1r•(]p,.'..
                                                                                                             ,.       <-- 0
                                                                                                       --r,_,._....D/.li-..f
         ---·--:;        h e--·-- f                                                    /,,,
                                                                                                         ...µ ' ~ a_.,L lt···1.- o
E                I
                  7' - -
                            .   e                                         ---/$;......_ --1j
                                                                                    /',.-

~
ì      1

  I 00 ~a
             Internal-
             combustion
                                                                                            '--'
                                                                                             j O.I            ,,.,,~~/
                                                                                                                           /k,

i I~
K.
                                                              d                               ~
                                                                                              1
                                                                                                                é?-P4
                                                                                                                      .
                                                                                                                              I
                                                                                                                          /~ .J.. 1




             iof                                                                             --io.01


             Il.r~                                       I
              ,_____.__,___LLl___ -.....~...1 ...J .....l..L.._._j .. _L __L LJ
                                                                                        .~
                                                                                              J
              I                           IO                        100                     1000
                                 Specific energy, watt-hr/lbm
FIG. 6.14 BATTERY CHARACTERISTICS (1970). (a) LEAD-ACID, (b) NICKEL-
CADMIUM, (e) NICKEL-ZINC. (d) ZINC-AIR. (e) SODIUM-SULPHUR. (f) LITHIUM-
CHLORINE.
172   ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN




many applications, including electric automobiles and space vehicles.
Nickel-cadmium batteries are now commonly used in battery-powered
electric appliances. They are also rugged, and bave a lifetime of a few
thousand duty cycles as opposed to a few hundred for lead-acid batteries.
A serious drawback is the relatively high cost of cadmium. Silver-zinc
batteries bave even greater specific energies but also suffer the dis-
advantage of high materials cost.
    A number of new batteries are under development, and represen-
tatives of the high technology of batteries are included on the right-hand
side of Fig. 5.14. A sodium-sulfur battery developed by the Ford Motor
Company uses relatively inexpensive materials and has a specific energy
an order ofmagnitude higher than lead-acid cells. But it must be operated
at high temperatures (300°C), which causes operational difficulties. An
attractive feature is that it can be charged at about the same rate that it
can be discharged, which is unusual for rechargeable batteries. The
lithium-chlorine battery under development at General Motors uses a
molten lithium-chloride electrolyte at around 650°C, and its contents are
rather hazardous. If the technical problems of safe containment can be
solved, the high specific energy ofthe lithium-chlorine battery could be a
factor that would spur its introduction to the consumer market, possibly
as an energy source for electrical automobiles.
    Other experimental batteries using organic electrolytes bave been
built; these seem to be limited to relatively low specific powers because
of the low electrical conductivity of the electrolyte; but who can say what
another dozen years of research on such devices might bring?
    The "fuel cell" is another device in which chemical energy is converted
directly to electrical energy. But unlike the battery, the fuel cell con-
tinuously takes in chemical fuels and discharges chemical wastes, and so
is more like a steady-flow engine. The thermodynamic idea :of the fuel
cell is to capture the chemical bonding energy as fully available electrical
energy bifore the energy has the chance to randomize into thermal energy.
Thus, the fuel cell is nota beat engine, and is not limited by the Carnot
efficiency; indeed, fuel cells theoretically can bave efficiencies as high as
100%, and practical devices have efficiencies ofthe order of60% (energy
output/chemical energy input). A schema tic of the hydrogen-oxygen fuel
cell is shown in Fig. 5.15. Gaseous hydrogen and oxygen enter the cell
at pressures of the order of 40 atmospheres and .are brought into contact
through porous electrodes. A liquid electrolyte between the electrodes
serves to limit the reaction rate and hence to provide the desired control.
Hydrogen diffuses through one electrode (called the "anode"), is ab-
sorbed on the surface, and then reacts with OH- ions in the electrolyte
                                     MAKING CHEMICAL BO.NDS WORK        173




                                    FIG. 5.15   FUEL CELL.




to form water and free electrons. Oxygen diffuses through the other
electrode (called the "cathode") and reacts with the water to form OH-
ions. The electrolyte controls the migration rate of OH- ions across the
cell. The electrons ftow out of the cell from the anode through the load,
and energy is taken from them in the load before they are returned to the
cathode. Water, the waste product of this fuel cell, must be continually
removed. Imagine; an engine in which water is the waste product instead
of carbon monoxide ! Fuel cells of this sort have been used on many
manned space missions, where the "waste" water can be put to .good
practical use.
   There are many types of fuel cells under development today. The
voltage of a cell is determined by the chemicals that are used as fuel, and
most cells have potentials around 1 volt. The main reason why hydrogen-
oxygen fuel cells are not in common use today is the fact that they require
catalytic surfaces on the electrodes (a "catalyst" is a cupid-like materia!
that does not really enter a chemical reaction but helps it to take place),
and platinum (very expensive !) is the best cataiyst. There have been
numerous experiments with other types of fuel cells. One of the attractive
features of the lithium-chlorine battery discussed earlier is that it can
operate as a fuel cell. There is special interest in fuel cells that use air
as the oxidizer. In particular, the hydrogen-air fuel cell seems very
            174   ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN



            attractive. The hazard problem of storing hydrogen can be solved by
            using a "reformer." In this scheme a hydrocarbon fuel is allowed to
   ·,
       :I   react with hot steam in a catalytic reactor to produce hydrogen, which
       I'
   :!i      is then used in the fuel cell. The technology of large reformers is fairly
            well developed, but smaller units, such as might be required for auto-
       li   motive use, need further development. Fuel cells that use hydrocarbon
   :~       fuels directly also have received some attention. Demonstration vehicles
   .,.:11   have been powered by hydrazine (a rocket fuel) and air cells, which can
            start up from room temperature and operate at under 100°C. If certain
            technological problems with the catalyst can be solved, and if the price
            of hydrazine can be reduced by 95%, this system could become a real
            contender in the electric-automobile market. Other fuel cells using
            methanol and air, or liquid petroleum gas (LPG) and air, are now under
            development. The advantages ofbeing able to use low-grade hydrocarbon
            fuels directly in a room-temperature fuel cell are obvious, and the concept
            is so attractive that there is great interest in long-term research aimed at
            its development.
                Let's think about the performance characteristics of fuel-cell systemit.
            Suppose we want to obtain a certain amount of energy from the system,
    li      as, for example, required by a certain period of automobile operation.
            The more energy we desire the more fuel we will have to put on board,
            and hence the greater will be the system weight. However, if we ask for
            just a little energy, then the main contribution to the system weight
            will come from the hardware and not the fuel. Now, a given fuel-cell
            system will have a given power capability. Considering all these factors,
            we reason that for small energy demands the specific power (power per
            system lbm) should be independent of the total energy to be delivered
            from one fueling. However, ifwe desire to increase the range ofthe vehicle,
            we will have to take on more fuel, and thus the specific power will drop
            as the specific energy (energy per system lbm) increases. When the fuel
            has increased to the point where its weight controls the system weight,
. i
~ i'        the specific energy will be virtually constant, determined only by the
            fuels used and the efficiency of the full cell. This reasoning explains the
            form of the fuel-cell performance curves shown in Fig: 5.16.
! l~
                Table 5.2 shows some projections of fuel-cell technology as it might
! ;'.
  ·,        exist around 1980. Although at this writing fuel cells have not yet devel-
            oped to the point where they can move into consumer markets in any
            major way, it does seem likely that their continued development will
            make this a distinct possibility within a decade or two. As energy tech-
            nology moves on in the years ahead, fuel cells will probably become
            everyday sources of clean energy for automobiles, homes, and perhaps
            even cities.
Tabla 5.2
The Outlook for Fuel-cell Technology*-1980

                                                  Voltage          Celi            System        System                  Fuel cost,
Fuel                               Temp.,°C       per celi         effi.ciency     effi.ciency   cost, S/kw   Life, hr   S/kwhr

Hydrogen/air                        80            0.7              0.47            0.43           100         1,000        l.43
                                                                                                                                          s:)>
Hydrogen/air                                                                                                                              2S
Wi.th LPG reformer                  80            0.7              0.47            0.35           150         1,000        0.46           z
                                                                                                                                          G')

                                                                                                                                          (')
Hydrogen/air                                                                                                                              :I:
                                                                                                                                          m
with kerosene reformer              80            0.7              0.47            0.35           180         1,000        l.21           s:
                                                                                                                                          n
                                                                                                                                          )>
Hydrogen/air                                                                                                                              r-
with ammonia reformer               80            0.7              0.47            0.38           120         1,000        0.40           tD
                                                                                                                                          ,o
                                                                                                                                          z
Hydrazine/air                       80            0.7              0.44            0.40           100         1,000      143              e
                                                                                                                                          cn
Methanol/air                        80            0.5              0.40            0.33          3,000        1,000        0.47           :!:
                                                                                                                                          o
                                                                                                                                          :o
                                                                                                                                          ;><;
LPG/air                            200            3.0              0.42            0.38          1,000        1,000        0.42

• "The Automobile and Air Pollution," Part II, U.S. Department ofCommerce, December 1967.
                                                                                                                                          .......
                                                                                                                                          OI


                                                                                                                                      ;


                                                                                   •
176      ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN




        1000   r·----------------- --- ---------- -
               l-! ______________________
                     Internal combust!on en9ine--"\_

E              l-                                      ----..."'-
:e
-;n-
...... 100 :-
to                                                              -· D.1
3:
 e<ll
a
                                                                    --- 0.01




                                                 _l             i.,_j
          1         -'
               1                                100             ·\000
                         Specific energy, 1Natt-hr/!brn

FIG. 5.16 FUEL-CELL CHARACTERISTICS (1970). (a) HYDROGEN-AIR. (b) KERO-
SENE-AIR, (e) METHANE-AIR.


CHEMICAL ENERGY: STORAGE, TRANSPORTATION. ANO TRADE
   Chemical energy is a form that is particularly well suited to both ship-
ment and storage; the bonding energy available in I lbm of gasoline is
about 18,000 Btu. In contrast, the potential energy of I lbm of water at
an elevation of 100 ft is only about 0.13 Btu! The vast oil and natural gas
shipments that take piace worldwide attest to the importance of chemical
energy in energy transportation. The other significant energy trans-
portation mode is electrical, but there are no known ways 1p store large
amounts of electrical energy cheaply.
   There bave been proposals for replacing our electrical-energy trans-
portation system by a chemical-energy transportation system using
hydrogen or alcohol as the "energy currency." Hydrogen has the advan-
tage ofhigh-energy density (52,000 Btu/lbm), can be made by electrolysis
of water, and can be used in fuel cells to produce electrical energy.
Alcohol can be produced from agricultural fuels, and thus looms large
in proposals for use of agriculture for solar energy conversion.
   These considerations make it clear that chemical energy will remain
very important in the years ahead; new chemical-energy commodities
will certainly become important in international trade. Countries that
can learn to produce chemical fuels cheaply using solar or nuclear energy
may well dominate the international scene in the next century.
                                          MAKING CHEMICAL BQ.NDS WORK              177



PROBLEMS

Balancing the atoms

 5.1   Complete the chemical equation for the combustion of ethane.



 5.2   Complete the chemical equation for the combustion of hexylene,




To develop your skill with numbers

 5.3   The atomic weights of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen atoms are

          c   12 grams/gmole
          H    I gram/gmole
          O   16 grams/gmole
       Compute the atomic weights of ethane (C 2 H 6 ) and hexylene (C 6 H 12 ).

 5.4   Do Probs. 5.1 to 5.3. Then, compute the number of grams of oxygen per
       gram of fuel for the two reactions.

 5.5   For each mole of 0 2 in air there are 3.76 moles of N 2 • The resulting
       molecular weight of air is about 29 grams/gmole. Do Prob. 5.4, and then
       compute the air/fuel ratio for the indicated reactions.

 5.6   The heat of combustion of ethane is 386 kcal/gmole and for hexylene
       953 kcal/gmole. Calculate the heat of combustion in Btu/lbm for each fuel
       (see Prob. 5.3).

 5.7   Do Probs. 5.1 to 5.6. Then assuming that the products of combustion have
       an average cP of 7 cal/gmole-°K, calculate the adiabatic flame temperature,
       assuming that the reactants are at room temperature, for the two reactions
       discussed.

 5.8   A power plant with an overall efficiency of 30% produces I Gw of electrical
       power using coal (Qf = 12,500 Btu/lbm) as the fuel. Calculate the annua!
       requirements for coal in tons.

 5.9   A gas-turbine engine produces 5,000 hp for industriai use. The engine has
       an efficiency of 25% and uses kerosene ( Qf = 20,000 Btu/lbm) as the fuel.
       Calculate the hourly fuel consumption in !hm.

5.10   A farmer wants to generate electricity by burning trash. He can purchase a
       small steam-boiler turbine and generator and the plant will have an overall
       efficiency of 12%. He wants to generate a tota! of 30,000 kwhr each year.
       Calculate the tonnage oftrash required, assuming that Qf = 7,000 Btu/lbm.
178    ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN




Some more interesting analyses

5.11   It has been suggested that the United States shift back to use ofwood as the
       major fossil fuel. A massive forest-station project is proposed, in which trees
       would be replanted in a 50-year cycle, and cut for fuel. The forests would
       provide additional recreational facilities prior to harvesting, and the
       planting program would employ thousands of low-skilled workers. Estimate
       the annual demand for wood fuel in lbm, assuming that 2 X 10 12 kwhr are
       generated in steam power plants with 35% efficiency. Estimate the volume
       ofwood involved (wood has a density ofaround 50 lbm/ft 3 ) in "board-feet"
       ("board-foot" is a volume l ft square by l in thick).
       Look up the board-footage yield per acre of timber in the northwestern
       United States, and calculate the acreage that would have to be harvested
       annually to supply the electrical demands. What total acreage would have
       to be under cultivation for this system? Discuss the feasibility of this plan,
       technical difficulties that might be involved, the impact of the plan on
       other elements of the economy (e.g., transportation), and the social and
       political values that would be relevant in a public discussion of the proposal.

5.12   It has been proposed that garbage be burned for production of electrical
       power. Pick a large city in the United States; find out its annual production
       of garbage in tons, and its annual consumption of electricity in kwhr.
       Estimate the electrical energy that could be produced from the garbage,
       and compare that with the electrical needs. Discuss the social, economie,
       and political questions that would be important in discussion of, imple-
       mentation of, or defeat of this plan. Based on your values and your
       quantitative analysis, what do you think of the plan?

5.13   One problem with solar energy is that it is not available at night. One
       possible alternative is to use solar energy to generate electricity during the
       day, to use this electricity to decompose water into hydrogen and oxygen,
       and then to combust the hydrogen with the oxygen over the 2.4-hr period
       to provide heat for the continuai production of electricity.
       The system will consist of a steam power plant that burns hydrogen to
       generate electricity, and another that uses the solar energy to generate
       electricity during the day to generate just enough electrical energy to
       decompose the hydrogen. The electrolysis process will require electrical
       energy of around 70 kcal/gmole, and the atomic weight of water is 18
       grams/gmole. The solar energy plant will convert about 30% of the
       collected solar energy into electrical energy for the electrolysis process.
       The combustion ofhydrogen will yield about 52,000 Btu/lbm, and the main
       power plant will convert about 35% ofthis energy into electrical energy for
       consumer use. About 100 Btu will be collected on each square foot of solar
       collector surface each hour during 10 daylight hours. Atomic-weight data
       are given in Prob. 5.3.
                                       MAKING CHEMICAL socrns WORK           179



      Calculate the following quantities for a system that delivers I Gw of
      electrical power ali the time:

         (a)   Daily solar energy collection requirements, Btu
         (b)   Solar collector area
         (e)   Daily mass of water electrolyzed, lbm
         (d)   Daily hydrogep. consumption rate, lbm

      Assuming that the products of combustion are water, which is cooled in a
      dry cooling tower and returned to be electrolyzed again, calculate the
      volume ofwater that must be handled each day (ft 3 ). Discuss the technical
      problems that you foresee with this system, and the social, political, and
      economie questions that would arise in serious consideradon of the pian.
5.14 A new coal reserve estimateci to contain 1010 ft 3 of coal-bearing soil with
     an average coal density of 90 lbm/ft 3 has been discovered adjacent to a
     popular recreational area. Estimates suggest that the average heat offorma-
     tion ofthe coal is around 13,000 Btu/lbm, and the utility companies in the
     area are seeking approval for initiation of open-pit mining activities. They
     claim that the new discovery will provide enough coal to run the nation's
     fossil-fuel power stations for 25 years or more. Discuss the situations
     quantitatively. Is this reserve worth developing at the possible expense of
     the recreational area? Is the recreational area worth saving in view of the
     vast amounts of energy that the coal reserve offers?
5.15 A proposed state law will outlaw power plant burners that operate with
     flame temperature less than 3,000°F. The idea is to force higher-efficiency
     power plants, in the interest of reducing the amount of pollutants from
     fossil fuels. The utilities companies claim that the law might actually
     increase the pollution problem. Sponsors of the law argue that the utilities
     companies are just trying to save their dying empires. As a politician
     seeking sound technical advice on the matter, what sort of consultant w9uld
     you seek for technical advice, and what sort of analysis might you ask him
     to provide? How would you go about deciding which point of view is
     correct?
HOW ELECTRONS
    WORK


          In which we see some
            electrifying things




SOME BASIC ELECTRIC CONCEPTS.

Newton's laws ofmotion and gravitation provided a scientific explanation
for some but not all the forces observed in nature. They do not, for
example, explain why a piece of amber when rubbed will attract pieces
of straw, a phenomenon known to Thales of Miletus in 600 B.c., or why
magnetite rocks will attract iron. Some two hundred years after Newton,
Hans Oersted observed a connection between these two phenomena, and
in the early 1800s a new science, "electromagnetism," was born. It took
many years to get the science straight, and in fact the job is still not qui te
complete. Theoretical physicists are still trying to pull electromagnetics,
gravitation, and quantum physics together into one grand physical theory;

180
                                               HOW ELECTRONS WORK        181



but the Einstein to do it has not yet spoken. Inventors began to make useful
electromagnetic devices before even the most basic concepts and principles
of electromagnetics were understood. lndeed, the desire to understand the
physics in order to make better devices was a prime motivating factor in
the development of electromagnetic science. In this chapter we will
acquaint you with those aspects of the science which will be most helpful
to you in understanding energy systems.
    In order to explain the various phenomena of electromagnetics,
scientists introduced severa! new basic concepts. The most basic concepì
in electromagnetics is "electric charge." Charge is conceived as a con-
served property of electric particles; charge cannot be created or destroyed.
It seems to come in very small but discrete amounts oftwo different types
called "positive" and "negative." Forees exist between charges; charges
of the same type repel one another, and charges of opposite type attract
one another. The magnitude of the force between two charges decreases
as the charges are separated. Part ofthe concept ofelectric charge is that
the total electric charge of an object is the sum of the charges of all
particles in or on the object. An object with zero total charge is called       •
electrically "neutra!."
    To be really useful, the concept of charge must be made quantitative
so that values of charge can be measured and magnitudes of electric forces
can be predicted. Careful experiments show that the force between fixed
charges varies inversely as the square of the distance between them, and
this leads to "Coulomb's law,"


                                                                       (6.1)


Here Q 1 and Q 2 are the valuesofthetwocharges, r isthedistance between
them, kc is a constant, and F is the force (positive for repulsion, negative
for attraction) between the charges. Figure 6:1 shows this law schemat-
ically. Just as Newton's law provides the fundamental way to think about
mass, Coulomb's law provides the fundamental way to think about
charge. The value and units of kc depend upon the units of measurement




                          FIG. 6.1   COULOMB'S LAW.
182   ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN




for charge. It is possible to set up unit systems in which kc = 1, analogous
with the treatment of Newton's law in the mks system [see Eq. (2.7)].
In such a system charge has the dimensions of ~force/distance. Alter-
natively, one can set up a measurement standard for charge independently,
and then kc will not be unity; this is analogous with the "engineering"
treatment ofNewton's law [Eq. (2.9)] and is the more modem approach.
The current international system uses the "coulomb" as the unit of charge
and the mks system for forces and distances. Y ou can think of the coulomb
as being defined in terms of the charge on an electron, with the electronic
charge having the value of - 1.6021 x 10- 19 coulombs. Then, kc has
the experimentally determined value of 8.99 x 10 9 newton-meter 2 /
coulomb 2 •
   To illustrate Coulomb's law, let's compute the force between two
electrons one "micron" (1o- 6 meters) apart:

                        newton-m 2
   F = 8.99 x 10 9
                         coulomb 2
               (-1.6 x 10- 19 coulomb)(-l.6 x 10- 19 coulomb)
          X
                                 (10-6 m)2
      =   2.3 x 10- 16 newton

or about the weight of one cell in that hamburger that weighs a newton.
   Another example will help establish a quantitative feel for the coulomb
as a quantity of charge. Let's compute the charge required to develop a
force of 1 newton between two equal charges separated by 1 meter.
Using Eq. (6.1),


   Q = r      J~kc = 1 m ~ 1 newton/(8.99
                                       ,
                                          x 10 newton-m /coulomb
                                                9           2          2)



                  =   1 x 10- 5 coulombs

You can calculate for yourself that a charge of -10- 5 coulombs is
equivalent to the charge of 6.2 x 10 13 electrons. So, lots and lots of
electrons a few feet apart will give rise to only a little shove.
   The previous calculation assumes that all the electrons are at the same
point. But, since like charges repel, the electrons will tend to push apart
from one another and distribute themselves around the surface of any
body on which they are placed. Ifa "test" charge is moved around near
the body, the charge will experience forces that depend in a much more
                                                   HOW ELECTRONS WORK         183



complicated way on its position. One could compute the force on the
test charge by summing the force contributed by each electron on the
body, but with 10 13 electrons to consider this is a lot of summing. It is
more convenient to use another concept called the "electric field."
Since the force on the test charge depends only upon the magnitude ofthe
test charge and its position, one can write

   F(x) = QE(x)                                                             (6.2)

where Q is the magnitude of the test charge and F(x) is the force; the
notation F(x) shows that F depends on the position of the test charge,
denoted by x. The factor E(x) is the "electric field," which also depends
upon position as indicated by the x. You can see that E has the dimen-
sions of force/charge, and hence the units of newtons/coulomb. The
electric field represents the total push of all other charges on a unit test
charge. Since the push F has a direction (in the language of mathematics
it is a "vector"), the electric field E also has a direction (it too is a vector),
namely, the direction of the push on Q. Figure 6.2 displays this idea.
According to Newton's law, a free body will accelerate in the direction
of an applied force. So, charged particles will accelerate in the direction
ofthe electric field; this has important application in a variety ofpractical
systems, including xerox copiers, dust precipitators for air-pollution
control, and television tubes.




                                        FIG. 6.2 THE ELECTRIC FIELD
                                        EXERTS FORCES ON CHARGES.


   The push that an electric field gives a charge will do work on the
charge if the charge moves. If the push of the electric field is constant
during this motion, the work clone on the charge by the electric field will
be

   W= F·L = QEL                                                             (6.3)

where L is the distance that the charge Q moves in the direction of the
electric field. If you think about it, the path from one point to the other
could be anything, and Eq. (6.3) would still hold, because there are no
forces on the particle perpendicular to the electric field; Fig. 6.3 shows
184     ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN




                       r·-
                        \L
                       i
'\t                 ~--L. __
E
            (a)
FIG 6.3 THE WORK DONE
DEPENDS ONLY ON THE POSITIONS
1 AND 2, AND NOT ON THE
CHOICE OF PATH.


this idea. This means that the work done does not depend on the path
taken from point 1 to point 2, but instead depends only upon the location
of points 1 and 2. The product EL is called the "electric potential" or
"voltage" difference between points 1 and 2. One can pick an arbitrary
reference point, and then define the voltage (relative to this reference)
for all other points. Denoting the voltage by V, Eq. (6.3) can be expressed •
as

                                                                       (6.4)

The work done by the electric field on the charge is therefore simply the
value of the charge times the difference in voltage between the stopping
and starting points. The voltage V has the dimensions of energy/charge,
and hence the units of newton-meters/coulomb. This complicated set of
units is given the nickname "volts,"

      1 volt = 1 newton-meter/coulomb

You may have had some previous experience with a voltmeter, which
reads the magnitude of the electric potential difference between two
points.
   Let's now consider a familiar 1.5-volt dry-cell battery, in which
positive charges (ions) collect on the positive terminal and electrons on
the negative terminal. The electrons don't move very easily through air,
but if an electrical "conductor," such as a copper wire, is used to connect
the positive and negative terminals, electrons will move freely through the
wire. An electron in the wire will experience a force attracting it toward
the positive terminal and repelling it from the negative terminal. The
electric field in the wire will be in the direction shown in Fig. 6.4. Elec-
trons, being negatively charged particles, will tend to move in the opposite
                                                  HOW ELECTRONS WORK         185




  Super
    dri
    sei      i
            J          !
     !L--..------~~---li
                               FIG. 6.4 ELECTRIC FIELD AND
                               ELECTRON FLOW FOR A DRY-CELL
                               BATTERY.


direction of the electric field, i.e., from low voltage to high. So, if the elec-
tron manages to move through the wire from one terminal to the other,
the work clone by the electric field on the electron will be

   W = Q(V2 -         V1 ) = (-1.6 x 10- 19 coulomb)(-1.5 volts)
          = 2.4 x 10- 19 joules
Note that V2 - V1 is negative because the electron moves opposite to the
direction of the electric field. The unit "joule" is shorthand for newton-
meter, which you get when you multiply coulombs times volts if you
remember that volts stands for newton-meter/coulomb. What happens to
this energy? In a copper wire the electron will simply bounce around as
it fights its way through the array of the wire's atoms to reach the positive
terminal. These collisions transfer energy from the electrons to the copper
atoms in a random way (entropy is produced), and the wire gets hot.
The electric field is produced by the positive and negative charges in the
battery. So, energy flows out of the battery whenever its electric field
does work.
    Another way to look at Eq. (6.4) is to say that the voltage is the
"potential energy per unit of charge." Then, the work clone by an electric
field as it pushes charges is equal to the increase in potential energy of
the charges.

STEADV ELECTRIC CIRCUITS

   Let's consider an entire stream of electrons moving along in a wire that
forms part of a closed circuit (Fig. 6.5). The "electric current" is defined
as the positive charge flow per unit of time across a section of the wire.
Recalling that the electrons have negative charge, the electron motion to
the left means in effect that the current is flowing to the right. If Q is the


                                           FIG. 6.5   ELECTRIC-CURRENT FLOW.
186   ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN




total (positive) charge that flows across the section and t is the time
required for this to happen, the current I is

       Q
  l=-                                                                (6.5)
    t

Current therefore has the dimensions of charge/time and the units of
coulombs/sec. For short this is called "amperes,"

   1 ampere = 1 coulomb/sec

An ammeter measures the rate of charge flow in "amps," which is short
for amperes. Y ou are probably familiar with fuses. A "fuse" is a device
which gets so hot that it melts when the current flow through it reaches
a certain amperage. When it melts, the closed electric circuit is opened,
and the current ceases to flow.
   Suppose we have a steady current flow in a wire, and a reference posi-
tion in the electric field that we have defined as "zero volts" (usually •
this is taken as the earth, and hence zero volts is called "ground"). If
the current should pass through a device and return to ground, the work
clone by the electric field on the charges forming the current would be

   W = QV = ItV

where V is the voltage difference across the device and again I is the
current flow. This is energy that could be converted to useful work in the
device. Thus, we can regard the product QV as the energy of the charge.
Then, the power P of the current flow is the energy flow per unit time, or

   P =IV                                                             (6.6)

Thus for a steady current ("direct current" or "dc") the product of the
potential (volts) and the current (amps) gives the power flowing with the
current. The units of power are volt-amps, which is called "watts,"
which is shorthand for joules/sec, which is shorthand for newton-meter/
sec, which is shorthand for ... well, you can figure it out in terms of
meters, kilograms, and seconds.
   For example, suppose we have a pair of large wires that carry steady
current to and from a "load" (the term commonly used for an expender
of electrical energy). Suppose one wire has a potential of V1 = 10,000
volts and the other wire is "neutral" or "grounded" (V2 = O volts). If
                                              HOW ELECTRONS WORK       187



the circuit carries a current of 2,000 amps, the power being delivered
to the load in the high-voltage wire is

   P = 10,000 volts x 2,000 amps = 2 x 10 7 watts = 20 Mw

Tue power being removed in the low-voltage wire is zero, and thus by an
energy balance 20 Mw is the net electrical power input to the load. This
is a lot of power, and we hope that the load uses it constructively. Let's
assume steady-ftow steady-state conditions exist in the load, and use
W and Q to represent the power outputs from the load as work and heat,
respectively. Since charge is conserved, the current ftows in and out ofthe
load will be identica!. Then, an energy balance on the load (Fig. 6.6)
gives

   IV1 = IV2 + W + Q
  energy           energy
  input            output
  rate             rate


Denoting the voltage difference V1 -    V2 simply by V, we can interpret
this energy balance as

    IV
  electrical
                w + Q
               power        power
                                                                      (6.7)
  power        output       output
  input        as work      as heat


   In this model the load converts part of the electrical power to useful
power Wand the rest to thermal energy (Q). The "conversion efficiency"
ofthe device could be defined as the ratio ofthe useful power output to the
electrical power input. If the load is a complex of direct-current electric
motors, the efficiency might be about 90%.
   As current flows through a light bulb or the heating coils in a toaster,
the electrons collide with the molecules in the conductor, raising the
conductor temperature. Such loads are called "purely resistive"; they
do not convert electrical energy to useful work but instead convert it all
188      ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN



to thermal energy. Since for many loads the ratio of the voltage difference
to the current flow is independent of the voltage, it is useful to define the
"resistance" R of a load by

            V
   R=-                                                                  (6.8)
            1

Here Vis the voltage difference across the load and I is the current flow
through it. Equation (6.8) is called "Ohm's law." If the load has a high
resistance (large R), there will be a large voltage drop fora given current;
if the load resistance is very low, a lot_ of current will flow for a given
imposed voltage. The units of R are volts/amp, which is the same as
newton-meters-seconds/coulombs 2 , which is pretty involved; so the
combination volts/amp is given the nickname "ohms," and resistances of
loads are stated in ohms.




FIG. 6.7       FIGURING THE BULB CURRENT.

   As an example, let's consider a light bulb that used 200 watts of
electrical energy when connected to a 100-volt dc supply (Fig. 6. 7). The
steady current flowing through the bulb is given by Eq. (6.6) as

  1 = !._ = 200 watts = 2 amps
       V    100 volts

From Eq. (6.8), the resistance of the bulb must be

  R = !' = 100 volts = 50 ohms
           I       2 amps

Suppose there was something wrong with the bulb, and its filament wire
had a resistance ofonly 10 ohms. From Eq. (6.8), ifwe connect it to the
100-volt supply, it will draw a current of

  I --     !" __ 100 volts = 10 amps
           R      10 ohms
                                               HOW ELECTRONS WORK       189



The power consumed by this bad bulb would then be

   P = VI = IO amps x 100 volts = 1,000 watts

In order to operate at steady state, the bulb would have to get sufficiently
hot that it could get rid of all this input electrical energy as heat by
radiation, conduction, and convection. Chances are that the temper-
ature would go up and up and that the filament would melt before a
steady-state operating temperature had been achieved.
   One can combine Eq. (6.6) and (6.8) to obtain a third equation that
relates the power P, the current I, and the load resistance, R,

                                                                       (6.9)

This shows that, for a given load resistance, the power that must be
removed as heat varies with the square of the current. This power is, for
obvious reasons, called the "I 2 R" (pronounced "eye-squared-are") loss
of the load. It occurs whenever a current flows through a resistance.
   Let's now consider what happens in a transmission line. The power
being transmitted is

   P, =VI

where V is the voltage difference between the "hot" and "ground"
transmission lines and I is the current flow in the circuit. Solving for I,


   I= P,                                                             (6.10)
        V

Now, the transmission line will have some resistance R, and hence
there will be some I 2 R Iosses, or "dissipation," in accordance with
Eq. (6.9). Thus, the dissipated power P4 is


                                                                     (6. ll)


This shows that, for transmission of a given amount of power P 1 through
a line of given resistance R, the transmission loss P4 goes down as the
square of the line voltage V. Very high voltages, up to 500,000 volts,
are used for electrical energy transmission lines to keep the I 2 R Iosses
small.
190     ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN




    For a wire the resistance R is proportional to the wire length L and
inversely proportional to the cross-sectional area A. The proportionality
factor depends upon the wire materiai. The "electrical conductivity"
of the materiai is usually denoted by the greek symbol K ("kappa"); and
is defined by the equation

            I L
    R                                                                  (6.12)
            KÀ

The electrical conductivity bears the same relationship to elèctric current
flow and voltage differences as the thermal condu~tivity bears to heat
flow and temperature differences [see Eq. (3.7)]. The reciprocai of K is
termed the "resistivity" of the materiai, and is denoted by the Greek
symbol p ("rho"). Thus, the resistance can be expressed as


                                                                       (6.13)


The res1stivity has the dimensions of resistance times length, and is
usually expressed in ohm-centimeters. Values of p for severa! materials
are given in Table 6.1. Note that silver has the lowest resistivity; it is
expensive. The next lowest is copper, which explains why it is used in
electric circuits and wires. Porcelain has a high resistivity, which explains
why it is used as an electrical insulator. There is also a big difference
between mercury and whiskey, which explains why mercury and not
whiskey is used in quiet switches and household thermostats.
   An electric circuit is composed of good conductors, such as copper or
other metals,. Electrons will flow with relative ease through any conductor.
However, ifthe circuit is "broken" by insertion ofan insulator (including


Table 6.1
Resistivity of Selected Materials

Substance         Resistivity, ohm-cm
Silver            1.6 X 10-6
Copper            1.7 X 10-6
Aluminum          2.8 X io- 6
Mercury*            1 X 10-4
Whiskey*            2 X 10s
Wood                    1012
Porcelain               1015

* Liquid.
'
                                                              HOW ELECTRONS WORK   191




                      ~                .     •I
                                                               City toad
    100,000 volts         '--~7Transmission line resistance    resistance
                          'f
                   6-~/VV'v'V\/vVv'V\~'v
                                     I ..,

                    1----------
    AG. 6.8    COMPUTING UNE LOSSES.

    air) through which electrons have enormous difficulty moving, so that the
    clectrons cannot easily return from whence they carne, they will bog
    down, and the current flow will effectively cease. So, there will be no
    steady-state current in an "open" electric circuit; for a current to flow,
    the electrons must have a closed conductor circuit all the way back to
    their source.
       As an example, let's compute the resistance of a 100-mile length of
    copper wire 1 cm in diameter (Fig. 6.8). The cross-sectional area is

          nd2           2
       A= -   = 0.78 cm
               4

    and the length is

       L = 100 miles x 5,280 ft/mile x 12 in/ft x 2.54 cm/in
          = 1.6 x 10 7 cm

    so the resistance is

           pL
       R = - = 1.7 x 10- 6 ohm-cm x 1.6 x 10 7 cm/0.78 cm 2
            A
              35 ohms

    which is about the same as the resistance of a 40-watt light bulb. Suppose
    a pair of such wires are used in the circuit supplying electrical energy
    to a city at a potential of 100,000 volts. If the transmitted power Pt is
    20 Mw = 2 x 10 7 watts, then the current is, from Eq. (6.10),


       I = pt = 2 x 10 7 watts/10 5 volts
           V
         = 200 amps
192   ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN




The I 2 R line loss in each wire is

   Pd = 1 2 R = (200 amps) 2 x 35 ohms = 1.4 x 10 6 watts = 1.4 Mw

(remember that ohm means volts/amp and watt means volts times amps).
Now the current must come in through one wire and go back to the
powerhouse through the other; so the total line loss will be twice this
amount, or 2.8 Mw. This is about 14% ofthe transmitted power! In order
to reduce line losses, an engineer could specify larger wires or higher
voltages. With larger wires the copper costs go up, the towers must be
stronger to support the extra weight and taller for safety, and installation
and maintenance of the heavier cable cost more. With higher voltages
there can be arcing across insulators, electrical interference to radio
receivers nearby, and other practical problems. As in any kind of engineer-
ing a compromise is required, and this compromise should be dictated
by a mix of the technical and economie realities and the pertinent social
values and priorities.
   The line loss results in a drop in the voltage supplied at the load. •
Applying Ohm's law (Eq. 6.8) to one of the transmission lines itself as a
load, voltage drop along each line will be

   V= JR = 200 amps x 35 ohms = 7,000 volts

So, the net voltage difference supplied at the load will be

   100,000 volts - 2 x 7,000 volts = 86,000 volts

    When more than one load is to be connected to a single po_wer supply,
there are two basic approaches. If the loads are connected in "series"
(Fig. 6.9a), the same current will flow through every load, the voltage
across each load will be given by Ohm's law [Eq. (6.8)], and the sum of
the voltage drops across each load will equal the supply voltage. If one
of the loads burns out, the circuit is opened, and so the current stops.
This is not very convenient; imagine having all your lights go out just
because one bulb burned out! Moreover, not all loads can handle the
same current. So, the series connection is never used in a power system.
Instead a "parallel" circuit is used (Fig. 6.9b). Here each load is supplied
with the same voltage, and the current that each draws is determined by
its resistance in accordance with Ohm's law. The main wires near the
power supply have to be able to carry the sum of the currents drawn by
all loads, and so these leads will want to be heavier wires. You might
compare the large wires bringing power into a home with the smaller
                                                                      HOW ELECTRONS WORK   193



                 ..,-......;:""'""
                    I
                                                 J----        ~--


                                       lf <_R,                Iv;
      ~:
       +!
      ~1
         i
         '                                 Jl
                                                 1--{
                                                 <:R          :' Vz
                 - l ___L
                                                     ,   2.
                                            'f   /
                        I
         'f
         o
                                       (a)




V




                                     (b)
FIG. 6.9 (a) SERIES CONNECTION-
EACH LOAD CARRIES THE SAME
CURRENT. {b) IN A PARALLEL
LOAD CONNECTION EACH LOAD
SEES THE SAME APPLIED ·VOLTAGE.


wires used to distribute the power in several parallel circuits connected
to the supply at the fuse or circuit-breaker box.
    People in the city would certainly not want household wiring at .the
potential of 86,000 volts. How can the voltage be reduced to a level that
is safe for locai consumption? One way is to use additional resistance in
series with the load. But this is wasteful of energy, for now in addition
to the 1 2 R losses ofthe load we have the 1 2 R losses ofthe control resistor.
In order to change the voltage of electrical energy from one level to an-
other efficiently, the unsteady behavior of electricity must be exploited
through use of "alternating current ("ac"). We'll look at this in the next
section.


ALTERNATING ELECTRIC CIRCUITS

   The notions of charge, Coulomb's law, and the electric field do not
provide complete explanations for all electric phenomena. We expect
that you are familiar with the notion of a magnetic field through previous
194   ENERGY: FROM NATJJRE TO MAN




study or play with magnets. Magnets can pull or push on other magnets,
and will pull on "magnetic materials" (defined as those materials which
are attracted by magnets). Scientists use the concept of a "magnetic field"
to explain these phenomena. A magnetic field is, by conception, sort of a
force field, something like an electric field, except that a magnetic field
by definition can exert forces only on moving charges. Since inventing the
two ideas of electric and magnetic fields, scientists have been able to
explain quantitatively and analyze all electromagnetic phenomena. This
ability provides a strong experimental confirmation of the theory of
electromagnetism.

                                                              h~agnct\c fìE,'\·d
                                                              lines N-->-S




                                        ,,,,~.......

                                                       '--~




FIG. 6.10   MAGNETIC FIELDS EXERT FORCES ON MOVING ELECTRONS.



    Figure 6.10 illustrates the effect of a magnetic field on a moving charge.
The lines drawn connecting the north and south poles of the magnet
represent the magnetic field. We show an electrical conductor moving
through the space between the pole faces. The magnetic fieÌd will exert
a force on the moving electrons in the conductor perpendicular to both the
magnetic field lines and the direction of motion. This will push the electrons
in the direction shown. The direction of the force exerted by the magnetic
field on electrons can be conveniently remembered by the "right-hand
rule" (see Fig. 6.10). The magnitude of the force depends upon the
electron velocity, the strength of the magnetic field, and the angle
between the direction of the magnetic field and the direction of the
electron motion. If the electrons are free to move along the conductor,
a current will flow, and then the magnetic field will be doing work on the
electrons. This is the basic idea behind electric generators.
    Magnetic fields themselves are produced by moving charges. The
formation of a magnetic field by a current flow is shown in Fig. 6.11. A
                                                 HOW ELECTRONS WORK         195




current produces a magnetic field perpendicular to the direction of current
flow in a manner determined by another famous "right-hand rule."
Stick your right thumb in the direction of the current I, and your fingers
will curi in the direction that the magnetic field points (see Fig. 6.10).
If the wire is coiled, each winding will produce a magnetic field in
accordance with the right-hand rule, and these will add up to give the
total magnetic field. Various complex magnetic field patterns can be
produced by winding the coils in various clever ways. This same idea
is used to explain permanent magnets; one thinks of the electron circula-
tion in the molecules as little current loops that produce the magnetism.
Magnetic materials are those in which the moving electrons are attracted
by an external magnetic field.
    To summarize, stationary charges form an electric field that exerts
forces on other charges; and moving charges form magnetic fields that
exert forces on other moving charges. But suppose you are a scientist
observing forces on charges from a vantage point on the moving conductor
in Fig. 6.10. To you the charges in the wire are stationary (before F gets
them moving), yet you see them as experiencing the force F. You can't
regard F as arising from a magnetic field, because you and your fellow
scientists have agreed that magnetic fields don't exert forces on stationary
charges. So, you must attribute the force F to an electric field. If the wire is
motionless between the poles, F will be zero. The faster the wire carries
you through the space between the poles, the larger F will be. So, from
your position on the wire you would see magnetic field lines flowing past
you. Y ou would find that the force F will depend on how fast these lines
passed by. You could then write down an equation describing the electric
field "induced" by this moving magnetic field, and if your name was
Faraday you would have discovered "Faraday's law of induction:" an
electric field is induced in any conductor moved through a magnetic
field, or in any stationary conductor subjected to a moving magnetic
field. The phenomenon of "induction" is basic to the operation of trans-
formers and certain types of motors and generators.
196   ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN




   Imagine pushing the wire in Fig. 6.10 back and forth through the
magnet. If the ends of the wire are attached to a load, a closed electric
circuit will be formed, and electrons will be pushed up and down the
wire as the wire moves back and forth. This will produce an alternating
current that flows first in one direction, then in the other, and so forth.
The induced electric field in the wire will also oscillate between up and
down, and so the voltage difference across the load will also oscillate
between positive and negative values. The average values of voltage and
current both will be zero (we'll examine the average power shortly). These
oscillations in both current and voltage characterize an "alternating
current" or "ac" circuit. Practically all the electrical power systems in
operations today are of the ac type. The oscillation frequency in the
United States is 60 hz (hz stands for "hertz," which is short for "cycles
per second"), while in many other countries the 50-hz system is standard.

 '~
 i1




                             Current i
                         Vottage V
FIG. 6.12   VOLTAGE AND CURRENT IN AN AC SYSTEM.


   Figure 6.12 shows the time histories of the voltage and current in an
ac system. Note that the voltage and current do not necessarily change
signs at the same time; i.e., they are "out ofphase." So, the electric field
might be tugging to the left while the current is still moving to the right.
This means that one has to be careful in thinking about the work being
clone on the charges, because the motions and forces on the charges are
not always in the same direction. Figure 6.12 also shows the time history
of the product of voltage and current. This gives the instantaneous rate
of energy flow past a point in the circuit, but because both V and I
change sign, VI can be positive part of the time and negative the rest.
In Fig. 6.12, positive VI corresponds to energy flow into the system,
negative VI to energy flow out. If the current and voltage are 90° out of
phase (meaning that one peaks while the other is crossiag zero) as shown
in Fig. 6.13a, the positive and negative contributions to the VI product
will exactly cancel, and thus there will be no average energy flow in the
circuit. In contrast, Fig. 6.13b shows a situation where V and I are "in
                                                     HOW ELECTRONS WORK                                        197



                                                ,,            "°'VI
                                            I        \        1
                                                          i             \
                                                         --i·-- ·r -· Average VI
                                                          '
                                                                                                Tirne
                                        o                                         ....   -- ····-·-----·····--;;-




                                                              { I   \
                      (a)                                     \O)

FIG. 6.13 POWER IN AC CIRCUITS.
(a) ZERO AVERAGE POWER,
(b) PURELY RESISTIVE LOAD.



phase" at all times, and hence the product VI is always positive. This
means that the average value of VI is not zero, and energy is ftowing into
the system.
   The phase relationship between V and I in an ac circuit is determined
by the nature ofthe load. Resistive loads (Fig. 6.14a) draw currents that
are in phase with the applied voltage, as in Fig. 6.13b. Common loads
also contain "inductive" elements, such as coils in electromagnets. Do
you remember the idea of"induced" electric fields? An oscillating current




                                n
         I                          I                                                     I
        -Ò!'-                                                                 ~
                                                                            o-- ---,
   !-~>}                                                                    ~1·
                                                                            V
                                                                                                +++ +++
                                                                                                         I
                                                                            ~
   !
                                t           (
   "
   o-----'-       I             o-----'·                                    o




            (a)                     (b)                                                        \e)
FIG. 6.14  TYPES OF AC LOADS.
(a) RESISTIVE, (b) INDUCTIVE,
(e) CAPACITIVE.
198   ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN




flow in a coil produces a changing rnagnetic field, which in turn induces an
electric field in the coil. The induced voltage tends to fight off the applied
voltage, which rnakes the current flow "lag" behind the voltage charge.
In an ideal coil (Fig. 6.14b) the resistance is zero and the current flow is
90° behind the voltage, so that no power is expended; there are no I 2 R
losses (R = O), and the process creates no entropy. So, ideally electro-
rnagnets do not require any power! However, real electrornagnets do
have sorne resistance, and so one rnust supply their I 2 R losses.
    Another type ofload is a "capacitor," which is essentially a bucket for
charge. Capacitors can be forrned by separating two rnetallic plates by a
nonconductor, which will not perrnit electrons to pass directly frorn one
plate to another. As the voltage across the plates rises (Fig. 6.14c),
electrons quickly flow to one plate, building up a negative charge. This
pushes electrons off the opposite plate, which then acquires a positive
charge. As the voltage difference reaches its peak, electrons start to rush
away frorn the capacitor. So, in a capacitive load the current tends to
"lead" the voltage (by 90° in a purely capacitive circuit).
    We see that, although the average values of V and I are both zero il\
ac circuits, the average of the product VI need not be zero. In other
words, although the charges are not really going anywhere, they have the
capability of transrnitting energy. This probably seerns strange, and an
analogy rnight be helpful. Think about waves on the ocean. A person in
a raft bobs up and down, and doesn't really go anywhere as a result of the
passage of waves. So, the waves don't really transport water; but they
clearly transport energy, as any surfer knows. Ocean waves travel at
speeds that depend in a cornplex way on the ocean depth and the wave-
length of the wave. Electrornagnetic waves travel at the speed oflight, and
hence travel frorn one end of a wire to another hundreds of rniles away
in a very srnall fraction of the period of one 60-hz oscillati_on. So, 60-hz
electric waves are so long that there aren't any crests or troughs in the
electrornagnetic waves in a transrnission wire. However, electromagentic
waves at frequencies of 10 8 hz are much shorter; television transmissions
use waves only a few feet long, the size of TV antennas.
    How can we quantify the voltage and current in an ac system if the
average voltage and current are both zero? We need measures of the
amplitude of the voltage and current oscillations, and it is customary
to use the "root-rnean square" ("rrns") values. The rrns value of a periodic
quantity like V is the square root of the average of the square of the
quantity,

                                                                       (6.14)
                                                 HOW ELECTRONS WORK        199



For "sinusoidal" variations of the sort used in power circuits, the rms
value is I JJ2
             of the peak value. So,

                                                                       (6.15a)



    Jrms                                                               (6.15b)


where Vmax and Jmax are the maximum voltage and current that occur
during the cyclic alternation. Ac voltmeters generally read Vrms and not
Vmax' and the 11 O-volt rating on household systems refers to Vrms·
   The average energy flow in an alternating system can be expressed in
terms of the rms voltage and current. For a purely resistive load, such as
light bulbs and toasters,



For other loads the power is expressed as

                                                                        (6.16)

where oc is the "power factor" determined by the phase relationship
between voltage and current discussed above. The product V,m.frms is
called the "apparent power," and is usually expressed in kilovolt-amps
(kva) rather than in kilowatts to avoid confusion with the true power
given by Eq. (6.16). Power lines and large transformers are normally
rated in kva. The power factor is equal to I for a purely resistive load,
and otherwise is less than I. Recall that, for inductive loads the current
tends to peak somewhat after the voltage, and one says that the "current
lags the voltage" by some angle <f>. In contrast, in capacitive loads the
voltage peaks somewhat after the current, and one says that the "current
leads the voltage." The power factor oc turns out to be just the cosine of the
angle </>. Ifthe power factor is low, either vrms or Jrms will have to be large
fora given power, and thus transmission-line engineers like to have power
factors very dose to unity to help keep transmission losses down. The
power factor of a load is sometimes purposely changed by adding either
induction coils or capacitors to the circuit at appropriate points in the
distribution system; since most loads are inductive, capacitors are often
used in transmission-line substations for power-factor correction. Power
factors range from O. 7 to I in typical operations.
200   ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN




   The resistance of a transmission line to electric-current flow produces
1 2 R line loss in both ac and dc circuits. As with dc circuits, ac trans-
mission lines are designed for high voltages to minimized line losses. The
common scheme is to generate energy at relatively low voltages (perlìaps
 1,000 volts), transform this to high voltage for transmission, and then
transform down to lower voltages for distribution at "substations" in
urban areas. The final step down to 11 O volts generally occurs very dose
to the load, and you probably have noticed the transformers that do this
job at the top of power poles near your home.




                                FIG. 6.15   TRANSFORMING AC
                                POWER.


    Transformers are basically coils of wire that are not connected electri-
cally but are coupled magnetically. The changing current flow in the
primary coil induces a changing magnetic field in the secondary coil,
and this changing magnetic field in turn produces a changing electric
field in the secondary coil by the induction process. The electric and
magnetic fields in the secondary coil act on electrons in the wires, and if
the circuit is closed, an alternating-current flow is set up in the secondary
circuit. The equations of electromagnetics reveal that, if the coils are
closely coupled by the alternating magnetic field that they share, the
voltage across each coil is proportional to the number of turns in the coil.
So, if N 1 and N 2 are the number ofturns in the two coils, and.V1 and V2
are the (rms) voltages across the coils (Fig. 6.15), then,

                                                                      (6.17)


For an ideal transformer, the power input to the primary coil all appears
as the output of the secondary coil. Hence, if the primary voltage is
greater than the secondary voltage, the primary current must be less than
the secondary current. Hence, in an ideal transformer the currents in the
two coils must be inversely proportional to the number of turns,

                                                                      (6.18)
                                                             HOW ELECTRO~S WORK   201-



Transformers designed to operate at high voltages have trouble with
arcing between windings of the coils, and special designs are required to
eliminate this problem. Real transformers have some I 2 R Iosses, of the
arder of a few percent of the transmitted power. The electrical energy
dissipated in 1 2 R heating must be removed to permit steady-state opera-
tion. Small transformers, such as those in radios and TV sets, are cooled
just by the natural circulation of air. Larger transformers used in
power-transmission networks are usually oil-filled and sealed; the oil
assists the natural convection process, and also helps prevent arcing.
Very large transformers require forced cooling with air or water.
   The oscillations in power in ac circuits mean that energy does not flow
steadily from the source. This represents an inefficiency in the use of the
generating and transmitting system, and so electrical engineers devised
the "three-phase" system to eliminate this problem. The idea is to use
three companion ac circuits as shown in Fig. 6.16. Voltages (relative to
ground) in the three wires are "120° out of phase," meaning that they
peak at different times in the cycle of the basic oscillation. So, when the
instantaneous energy flow to load l is dropping, the energy flow to the
other two loads can be rising, and if the average power used by each load
is the same ("balanced loads"), the instantaneous total power outflow
from the source and down the transmission system will be constant.
   There are two basic schemes for connecting three-phase power. In the
Ll-connected system of Fig. 6.16a each load sees the full rms line-to-line
voltage, and the current coming down each line splits to pass through two
loads. In the Y-connected system of Fig. 6.16b the full line current is fed
through each load, and the rms voltage across each load is less than the
rms voltage between two lines. In the United States practically all
electrical energy is generated and transmitted as three-phase power.
You will notice the three lines high atop towers in the high-voltage trans-
mission lines.
   Almost all industriai users require three-phase power for motors, but



         o---·-------·---------·f·--·----?fT
Supplv
     ~
                             Vi ~ !    .   ~   '       I
         o------·-·--------·--- t
                             Vz
                                f \ 2'"\'> 7•,j3 l V
                                       V (         i   '.
                                                       ! 3

         o---------       _:_J_  ___:_$j
                                   \<" I             '
                                                   _'L.
                         (él)                                         (b)
FIG. 6.16 THREE-PHASE POWER.
(a) DELTA CONNECTION. (b) Y
CONNECTION.
202   ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN




most homeowners require only single-phase power. So, at substations
the high-voltage power is transformed to some intermediate voltage for
transmission within the city, still as three-phase power. At thousands of
locations within the city transformers are hooked up to two of the three
wires on the power pole, and low-voltage single-phase power is delivered
from the transformer to houses nearby. The utility company tries to
balance the load seen by the three-phase supply line by keeping about
the same number of houses supplied by each of the three pairs of wires
in the three-wire three-phase line. Figure 6.17 shows a schematic of this
sort of system. Note that two houses have only the normal 110-volt
single-phase supply but that three wires lead from the single-phase trans-
former to one of the houses. The central wire is a "ground" wire, and the
other two wires are at an rms voltage of 110 volts above the ground.
However, the rms voltage difference between these two "hot" lines is
220 volts. The 110-volt single-phase system is used for lighting and small
appliances, and the 220-volt single-phase supply is used for stoves, clothes
dryers, and shop motors. The more ambitious homeowner-craftsman
might want to have three-phase 220-volt power in his garage, which the •
utility company will gladly supply for a price.
   Actual electrical energy distribution systems are much more com-
plicated than Fig. 6.17 suggests. There may be additional transformation




Generator
1000volts




FIG. 6.17 SCHEMATIC OF PUBLIC ELECTRICAL POWER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEMS.
                                               HOW ELECTRONS WORK        203



stages, switches, and circuit breakers, and the outputs of severa! power
stations will usually be connected so that they jointly supply all the loads.
Whenever the power required by the various loads changes, as, for exam-
ple, when you turn off a light, somewhere a generator will have to cut
back slightly on its power output. If a major industriai user cuts back
suddenly, and if the generator can't respond quickly enough, the voltages
in the system can build up quickly, triggering circuit breakers, shutting
off other loads, and thereby causing all kinds of havoc. Or, if one power
plant shuts down suddenly from a malfunction, others have to take up the
load, and if they can't respond quickly enough, the system voltages may
drop, lights dim, and motors stall and then stop from excess current when
the system voltage comes up suddenly. Peculiar chains of events such as
these have produced sudden "blackouts" over wide areas. There are
many advantages to having such a complex "electrical grid" system, but
it does couple many users to one another and many suppliers to many
others. But this is true ofmany things in any complex society.

GENERATORS ANO MOTORS
   Let's now look at how generators make electrical energy and how
motors convert this to useful work. Electrical generators consist of a
magnetic field and a complex of moving wires called the "armature."
Figure 6.18 shows a schematic that is useful for understanding how they

                                                      ,.,-r
                                                ~" ac voltage
                                              a ~hd<09 sontact


                                                  ....__.,,.




                    (a)



                                                               (e)
FIG. 6.18 SCHEMATIC OF GENERA-
TION PRINCIPLES. (a) BASIC
ARMATURE. {b) SLIP RING
CONNECTOR. (e) COMMUTATOR.
204   ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN




work. As the armature is turned through the magnetic field, a potential
difference develops at the ends of the armature wires by the induction
processes described previously. * For half the rotation cycle the voltage
difference between points a and b will be positive, and for half it will be
negative. So, if terminals a and b are connected to an external circuit
through "slip rings" as shown in Fig. 6.I8b, an alternating current will
flow in the external circuit. However, if "commutators" are used (Fig.
6.18c), the external circuit will always see a voltage of the same sign,
and hence a direct current will flow in the external circuit. So, in Fig. 6.18
we see the basic ideas behind both ac and dc generators.
    Of course, in practice things are more complicated. Figure 6.19 shows
more detail on the dc "shunt-wound" generator, which uses energy drawn
from the generator output to provide current to an electromagnet that
provides the magnetic field. The copper field windings have such a low
resistance that a large current will flow in the field windings unless an
additional resistance is placed in the field circuit, and the shunt resistor
is therefore added to contro! the field current. The generator is normally
started without any external load, and the armature current is used solely •
to power the field magnet. As the field builds up in strength, the output
voltage increases, and this further increases the field current and magnetic
field strength. The armature voltage therefore continues to build up, but
not indefinitely. The coils of the field magnet are wrapped around an iron
core, and when this core becomes fully magnetized, the field strength
stops increasing. The output voltage therefore builds up until a steady-




                                                              f~
                                                               >!
                                                              ~i
                                                                                \
                -·-·-·.....,,,..---···-- -·
                                                              -s !
                                                              o   1--       ······-···----
              Generator                                                 Load current
                                              (a)                         (b)
FIG. 6.19 SHUNT-WOUND DC
GENERATOR. {a) SCHEMATIC.
(b) CHARACTERISTICS.


* Remember, if you take a reference frame on the stationary magnet, you explain the
voltage differences as resulting from the forces that the magnetic field exerts on the
electrons in the moving wire. If instead you ride on the armature, you explain the voltage
difference as a result of the moving magnetic field that you see from this reference.
                                               HOW ELECTRONS WORK                                   205




state leve! is reached. The no-load voltage can be controlled by adjusting
the shunt resistance, which in turn alters the field current and hence the
strength of the field magnet. So, it is easy to contro! the output voltage
from a dc generator.
    Suppose now we connect a load to the generator; you can think ofthe
load as a bunch of light bulbs. This will permit electrons to move freely
out of the generator and through the load circuit back around to the
generator. The armature voltage will drop slightly, and so the strength
of the field magnet will be reduced somewhat. But the shunt resistance
can be reduced to increase the field current so as to keep the output
voltage constant. The generator is now putting out electrical energy that
it must be getting from somewhere. The motor, turbine, or horse driving
the generator must be working hard to drive the generator in order to
force electrons to move through the armature and load.
    If the shunt resistance is not changed by hand or automatically as the
load is increased, the output voltage will fall off for the reasons explained
above, and so a dc shunt-wound generator will have the output character-
istics shown in Fig. 6.l9b. A clever bit of engineering gets around the
drooping-voltage problem. By placing another winding in the field, and
passing the full armature current through this field, the strength of this
"series" field winding will increase as the armature current goes up, and
this provides a tendency for the output voltage to increase with increasing
load. By proper balancing of the series and shunt windings, a machine
can be made in which the output voltage is nearly independent of load, as
shown in Fig. 6.20. These generators are called "compound" dc gener-
ators; they are chiefly used in situations where the load is subject to rapid
fluctuations, as, for example, in an urban rapid-transit system.
    Generators for high current and voltage output have difficulty with

        Shunt resistor
                                                            A
                                                      il)   ~

                                                       m'.;.....--- - - - - -
                                                      ro
                                                      ±. ;
                                                      o
Field                                                 >



                                                                       _,_   -~,......;~   ..... ,..,,   ~-:>




                                                                Output current
                         (a)                                        (b)
FIG. 6.20 COMPOUND DC
GENERATOR. (a) SCHEMATJC.
(b) CHARACTERISTICS.
206   ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN




arcing in slip rings or commutators. This can be eliminated by turning
the generator "inside out," i.e., by rotating the magnetic field while
holding the armature windings stationary. The magnetic field is produced
by electromagnets mounted on the internal rotor, but these require
relatively small amounts of current that can easily be handled with slip
rings and carbon or copper mesh brushes. The armature (or "stator")
consists of an iron ring with induction coils wound on the inside. The
magnetic poles on the rotor move past the ends of these coils at a very
short distance from them. Since the current in the armature loop will
alternate in direction, as described previously for the "inside-in" gener-
ator, this scheme is suitable only for generation of alternating current.
The frequency of alternation is determined by the rotor speed and the
number of poles. Practically all large generators deliver three-phase
power, which can be obtained by proper angular spacing of the windings
on the armature and stator. In power station applications the speed ofthe
generator is accurately controlled to give precisely 60-hz oscillation. The
output voltage is then fìxed by the generator design but may be trimmed
by altering the current supplied to the rotor. Typical machines operate
at 550, 1,100, 2,200, 6,600, 13,200, and 20,000 volts.
   Electric motors are essentially the opposite of generators. Since
magnetic fields produce forces on moving electrons, if one forces a current
to ftow in the armature windings on a rotor the magnetic forces on the
moving electrons will be transmitted to the wires, and with proper con-
figuration the rotor can be made to turn. In a dc motor the current is
supplied through commutators to the armature. The motor speed for a
given load will depend upon the magnetic field strength and the armature
current, either of which can be adjusted to contro} the speed. The most
common approach is to vary the dc supply voltage, which allows one to
adjust the motor speed over a wide range. This feature of dc motors makes
them particularly useful in applications where speed contro} is important.
   The resistance of the armature windings is generally very low, and so
they tend to draw a lot of current when not moving. Once the rotation
begins, the moving armature windings act like a generator and develop
a voltage that tends to oppose the current driving the motor, holding the
armature current at a tolerable value. So, start-up of dc motors presents
a problem; in order to limit the armature current on a start-up, a
resistance must be placed in series with the armature. This must be
removed as the machine comes up to speed. Automatic motor-starter
boxes are usually used for this purpose. If you have ever had the thrill of
a ride on an electric trolley, you may remember the operator using a
crank handle to get things going. This is how he alters the armature
                                               HOW ELECTRONS WORK       207



series resistance to get the trolley moving. There are many other subtleties
of winding that are used in dc motors, each being engineered into the
motor to help in starting, speed contro!, smoothness of load change,
efficiency, etc. But the basic ideas are the simple ones outlined above.
    The most common type of ac motor is the induction motor. It consists
ordinarily of a stator to which power is supplied. The alternating-current
flow in the stator produces a rotating magnetic field that is used to pull
around the iron core of the rotor. In "squirrel-cage" induction motors
the iron core ofthe rotor has slots in which run heavy copper bars parallel
to the rotation axis. These conducting bars are connected at the ends by
copper rings, and it is this cagelike structure of the copper conducting
circuit that gives the motor its name. An alternating current flows in the
rotor, which is not connected electrically to external circuits. The rotor
current acts to magnetize the rotor, and thus provides a push against the
rotating magnetic field in the stator. The rotor conductors must cut
the rotating magnetic field lines in order to develop current, and hence the
rotor must turn at a slightly lower speed than the rotating magnetic field.
The amount of "slip" depends upon the winding scheme and the spacing
ofrotor and stator; many motors operate at 1,750 rpm with a rotating
magnetic field that spins at 1,800 rpm when connected to a 60-hz ac
supply. Three-phase induction motors spin in the direction ofthe rotating
magnetic field, and this direction can be reversed by interchanging two
of the connecting wires. Single-phase induction motors run in the direction
that they are started, and this can be controlled by special "shading
coils" that are wound into the machine to produce a weak preferential
rotation for starting. These may require current through brushes and
slip rings, but only small amounts of current are required, and thus the
sliding contacts do not present any serious engineering problems.
    Squirrel-cage induction motors tend to produce high torque at near-
maximum speed, and have low torque at low speed. This is not desirable
for applications requiring high torque at start-up; for such situations
"wound-rotor" induction motors are preferable. The squirrel cage is
replaced by windings that are connected to an adjustable resistance out-
side the motor through slip rings. By adjusting the resistance, the rotor
current can be controlled, and this permits contro! of the motor torque-
speed characteristics. Figure 6.21 shows the torque-speed characteristics
of typical squirrel-cage and wound-rotor induction motors.
    Three-phase induction motors will run if only two lead wires are con-
nected to a single-phase power supply. However, three-phase voltages are
generated by induction in the stator windings, and hence the machine
can be used to convert single-phase power to three-phase. The motor
208      ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN




            High rotor
            series resistance
                   /



                          -----Low rotcr
w                               series resìstance
~l
s... .




~ L_._ . . . . . . _._ _. _ __
             Speed, rpm
FIG. 6.21    CHARACTERISTICS OF AC INDUCTION MOTORS.


runs without shaft power output, and is then termed a "phase converter."
Railway locomotives often use phase converters, which permit the track
to supply only two-phase power and the drive motor to operate on three-
phase power.
    The speed of an ac motor is virtually independent of the supply
voltage, and can be varied only by changing the frequency of the ac
supply, by altering the winding, or by changing the slip. Some motors
employ two sets of windings and hence can run at two speeds. The speed
will of course drop off slightly as the motor is loaded up; i.e., the slip
increases slightly with load. For many applications it is desirable to have
a motor that runs at precisely a constant speed, independent of load.
The "synchronous motor" does this by using a dc power supply to provide
the rotor current, in which case the rotor turns at exactly the rotation rate
of the sta tor magnetic field. The dc supply is often made an integral part
of the motor. Clock motors are of this type.
    The efficiency of electric generators and motors depends upon the
design, load, speed, power factor, and other operating facfors. Large
three-phase generators have efficiencies (conversion of mechanical to
electrical), as high as 98%. Small (1-hp) motors may have part-load
efficiencies as low as 75%, while large three-phase motors have efficiencies
as high as 95%. Generator efficiencies tend to be lower at low power
factor, which is why so much importance is placed on keeping the power
factor of the total load on an electrical power network as dose to unity as
possible. The mechanical energy that is not converted to electrical energy
in a generator, and the electrical energy that is not converted to mech-
anical energy in a motor, of course becomes thermal energy that must
be removed from the machine. In large machines this constitutes con-
siderable power, and so elaborate cooling provisions are often employed.
                                              HOW ELECTRONS WORK       209



DIRECT-ENERGY-CONVERSION SYSTEMS

   In previous chapters we described the technology of conventional
power-generating systems. We saw the long chain of energy conversion
from chemical to thermal in a combustion chamber, thermal to mech-
anical in a working fluid cycle, and then finally mechanical to electrical
in generators as just discussed. There is considerable interest in schemes
which avoid some or all of the intermediate stages in this process, and
since the end of World War II there has been considerable research and
development on various schemes for "direct energy conversion." The fuel
cell discussed in the last chapter is basically a device for going directly
from chemical energy to electrical energy. In this section we will look
at some important schemes for going more directly from thermal energy
to electrical energy, schemes that do not employ a conventional electrical
generator.
   The first "DEC" device to be used to any extent was the "solar cell," a
device for conversion of incident solar energy directly into electricity.
Solar cells today are used on practically all space vehicles, on transistor
radios for the beach, and in exposure meters on cameras. Light particles
("photons") striking the molecules in a semiconductor (such as cuprous
oxide) dislodge electrons, which move easily into an adjacent metallic
conductor (such as copper). This gives the copper a negative potential
with respect to the semiconductor, and hence electrons will flow through
an external circuit to return to the semiconductor (Fig. 6.22). The
voltage is determined by the materials used; practical cells have voltages
of the order of 1 volt. The power output is limited by the incident solar
energy and by the efficiency of the cell; modem cells are ab le to convert
only about 15% of the incident solar energy to electrical energy, which
means that vast areas are required for generation of large amounts of


Metal




            Load
FIG. 6.22   THE PHOTOVOLTAIC CELL.
210   ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN




FIG. 6.23   THE MHD SYSTEM.



power. Schemes for doing this in orbit and sending the electrical energy
down to earth in a microwave beam have been analyzed in some detail,
but this is a bit far-fetched for implementation in this century.
    A DEC scheme that will be implemented in the very near future goes
by the mindboggler "magnetohydrodynamics," or "MHD" for short.
The MHD system relies on the basic phenomena of electromagnetics, ~
namely, that a voltage will develop along an electrical conductor moved
properly through a magnetic field (hence "magneto"). In a conventional
generator the conductor is a copper wire, but in an MHD generator the
conductor is a fluid (hence "hydro") moving at high speed (hence
"dynamic"). The MHD system is shown schematically in Fig. 6.23.
The fluid is a gasata very high temperature (2000 to 5000°K), "seeded"
with elements such as cesium that ionize (lose electrons) at these elevated
temperatures. The presence of free electrons in the gas makes it capable
of conducting electric current. The gas is accelerated to a high velocity
in a nozzle, usually a supersonic nozzle of the rocket type, and then sent
through a strong magnetic field. The magnetic field pushes. the moving
electrons sideways in the flow channel, causing a voltage difference to
develop between the two sides of the channel. Electrons will flow around
through the external load when these sides are connected to an external
circuit. Thus, the MHD generator can be used to produce dc power,
which of course can be converted to ac outside the MHD system in a
variety ofways. The high-temperature gas can be produced by combustion
of fossil fuels, and the MHD system thereby eliminates the turbine, heat
exchangers, etc. The real advantage is the possibility of using temper-
atures well above those that can be used in a conventional power plant,
and this means that the potential efficiency of conversion from thermal
energy to useful electrical energy is higher than in a conventional system,
at least so says the second law of thermodynamics.
    There are many practical problems associated with MHD generators.
                                                 HOW ELECTRONS WORK        211



 The surfaces used to draw off the electric current ("electrodes") must
 not get too hot or they will melt; so, one.thinks of cooling them with
 water. But if the gas dose to the electrodes gets too cold, it will no longer
 be ionized, and hence it will not conduct the desired current. Potential
 differences also tend to develop along the channel in the ftow direction,
 and this gives rise to currents ftowing parallel with the ftow. So, one thinks
 of segmenting the electrodes. But this gives rise to other problems, and
 on and on it goes. Nevertheless, the promise isso great that considerable
 research and development effort has been devoted to MHD, particularly
 in the Soviet Union. One of the major problems is that the magnets used
 in experimental MHD channels require large amounts ofpower, usually
 more than the channel itself puts out! One must go to very large sizes
 to get a system in which the MHD channel output power is enough to
 drive the magnets and still have a net power output.
    The problem of high magnet power will very likely be solved through
 use of "superconducting magnets." At very low temperatures (e.g., 4°K)
certain materials become "superconductors," in that they offer essentially
zero resistance to the ftow of electric current. So, by winding a magnet
out of such a materiai and cooling it to superconducting temperatures,
the magnet-power requirements can be made virtually negligible. Of
course, one must consider the power required to maintain the magnet at
the low temperature; with perfect insulation against heat loss one could
simply immerse the magnet in liquid helium, and space-age technology
has given us insulations that are remarkably dose to perfect. So, the
technology for using superconducting magnets is available, and at this
writing the first small experimental MHD channel to operate with a
superconducting magnet was being fired up in the High Temperature
Gasdynamics Laboratory at Stanford University.
    Many practical problems with MHD power systems remain to be
solved, others to be discovered. The best way to couple MHD in with
conventional power systems is still a subject of study. It is not possible to
extract all the energy from the hot gases using MHD. As energy is
extracted, the gases cool, and this reduces their ability to conduct elec-
tricity. So rather than throw away the energy in the moderately hot
exhaust from an MHD generator, one can use this energy to boil steam
for a conventional steam power system. The MHD unit then becomes a
"topping cyde," as indicated in Fig. 6.24. Figure 6.25 shows the world's
first MHD-steam power station designed along these lines during its
construction in the Soviet Union, where a considerable research and
development program in MHD has been going on for over 20 years. As
experience is obtained with this pilot system, the problems of MHD
will gradually be solved; it is qui te likely that there will be severa!
212   ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN




MHD-conventional power systems in operation in both Russia and the
United States by the end of this century.
   Another DEC system that shows promise for applications at lower
power levels is the "thermoelectric" converter. This device takes advan-
tage of the fact that a voltage difference develops in a circuit composed •
of two dissimilar conductors or semiconductors subjected to temperature
differences as shown in Fig. 6.26. Thermoelectric phenomena provide a
means for direct conversion of heat into electrical energy, and a number
of small devices using this effect have been built. In the Soviet Union
kerosene lamps are used to provide the heat for thermoelectric generation


To stearn - - -
generator



MHD channel - - - -
outlet



Magnet -----




MHD channel
[nlet


FIG. 6.25     MHD PLANT UNDER CONSTRUCTION IN THE SOVIET UNION.
                                                HOW ELECTRONS WORK       213




                                         FIG. 6.26   THERMOELECTRJC
                                         CIRCUIT.


of electricity to operate small transistor radios in rural areas. The effi-
 ciency of thermoelectric generators is very low (10%), and because they
are inherently irreversible devices, there is no hope of approaching the
 Carnot efficiency. Thus, the facts of life and science have limited the
development of thermoelectric technology. Although thermoelectric
systems can never be fully "reversible," they can be operated in reverse;
i.e., a current can be supplied with the result that heat is pumped from a
low-temperature region to a region at higher temperature. If you enjoy
reading patents, read number 3080723, which describes a thermoelectric
blanket that (in principle) can be used for either heating or cooling; this
device has never been marketed, probably because of the immense
practical problems involved.
    In spite of their low efficiency, the compactness and mechanical
simplicity of thermoelectric converters make them especially well suited
to applications where long operation without servicing is required. The
first nuclear power system to operate in space involved a "radioisotope"
source ofthermal energy and a thermoelectric converter. In these systems
radiation from the decay of radioactive materials collides with atoms,
exciting them to vibrate in a random manner, and hence increasing the
internal energy of the system. This makes it hot, and energy can be taken
out of the system as heat to supply a thermoelectric generator. The
generàtor must reject some "waste heat" at a lower temperature, and so
must be provided with cooling. Systems of this sort were used on Apollo
missions to the moon and other space missions. The French have devel-
oped a small radioisotope-powered thermoelectric converter for implan-
tation in the body. This device generates electrical pulses for stimulation
of the heart, and is in effect a "nuclear thermoelectric pacemaker."
The amount of power delivered is very small, about 40 microjoules per
pulse at 72 pulses per minute. Thermoelectric generators will probably
be used widely some day in very low power applications of this sort.
    The "thermionic converter" works on the phenomenon of "therm-
ionic emission," the streaming of electrons from a very hot metallic
surface. In vacuum tubes used in radio and television sets this principle
is used to generate a stream of electrons that are then controlled to perform
the desired function of the tube. In the thermionic converter "diode"
214   ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN



the electrons are collected on a cold surface in the "tube" and then al-
lowed to flow around through an external load circuit back to the emitting
surface. The emitter, or "cathode," assumes a positive potential, and the
collector, or "anode," is the negative terminal of the converter. Energy
must be transferred from the anode as heat in order to maintain it at a
suitably lower temperature. The efficiency of the generator is limited by
the Carnot efficiency, and the generator can be viewed as a heat engine
using electrons as the working fluid. Figure 6.27 shows the basic idea of a
thermionic converter. Thermionic-converter diodes are sometimes
vacuum tubes, but better performance has been obtained with gas-filled
tubes.




                                         FIG. 6.27 THERMIONIC
              Load                       CONVERTER.


    Vacuum diodes must have very dose spacings (of the order of 0.02
mm), for otherwise the retarding potential arising from the distribution
of electrons in the gap becomes too great for satisfactory operation.
Diodes of this type have been operated with cathode temperatures of the
order of 1500°K and with the anode at approximately 900°K, yielding
power densities of the order of 2 to 10 watts/cm 2 • The energy-conversion
efficiency of these systems is of the order of 3 to 12 %. The small spacings
are difficult to maintain, especially with large cathode-anode temperature
differences, and short-outs are frequent. The gas (plasma) diodes employ
easily ionizable elements, such as cesium, whose positively charged ions
tend to neutralize the retarding effects of the space charge, allowing
larger spacings to be employed (1 mm). Efficiencies of the order of 15%
have been obtained with this type of plasma diode operated at cathode
temperatures of about 2500°K.
    The thermionic converter is well suited for the production of electrical
power in space from a nuclear-heat source. Since the energy which must
be rejected as heat must be radiated to space, and high temperatures
are required for low-weight radiators, space-systems designers can accept
low efficiency in the interests of lightweight nonmechanical power-
conversion equipment. The thermionic converter will probably also find
application as a topping device for Rankine power systems.
                                                   HOW ELECTRONS WORK          215



PROBLEMS

For getting a feel for numbers

6.1   A 110-volt household circuit is fused at 30 amps. What is the maximum
      power that can be drawn from this circuit?

6.2   A house has 10 of the circuits described in Prob. 6.1, and in addition has
      two 220-volt circuits fused at 40 amps for the stove and electric dryer.
      What is the maximum power that can be consumed in this house?
6.3 A small factory has 440-volt wiring capable ofhandling 50 amps. The power
    factor for the plant averages around 0.85. What is the maximum electrical
    power that can be used in the plant?

6.4 A farmer wants to run dc power from his barn to a pump 2 miles away. He
    has plenty of 14-gauge copper wire (0.064 in diameter) but is worried
    about the voltage drop in Iines 2 miles long. The pump will draw a current
    of 20 amps when supplied with 80 volts, and will operate properly when so
    supplied. In order to make up for voltage drop in the current-carrying
    lines, the voltage at the barn must be higher than 80 volts. Compute the
    required voltage difference between the lines at the barn, the pump power,
    and the 1 2 R power loss in the two lines.

6.5   A three-phase high-voltage Iine carries power 200 miles from the generating
      station to the city. The line current is I amp and the "apparent power" is
      220 kva. Determine the wire diameter that must be used if the 1 2 R Iine
      losses are to be kept below 10% of the apparent power.


For getting a feel for hardware

6.6   Take a trip around your locai urban area. Locate the power-distribution
      stations, and find out what voltages are input and output from this station
      (usually posted on the poles). Look at the pole transformers in your neigb.-
      borhood; are they two-phase or three-phase units (how many input and
      output wires?) Does your locai pole carry more than the common 110-volt
      household supply? What other services are carried on your locai poles?
      Who owns the poles? Write a brief account of what you have learned about
      the distribution system that serves you electricity.

6.7   Visit your locai college library, and scan through some recent copies of
      Electrical Review, Electrical World, and Power Engineering. Look at the hard-
      ware shown in the advertisements, and try to figure out what it is for.
      Try reading some of the descriptive articles. Write a brief account of your
      impression of the state-of-the-art in the field of electrical power and the
      sort of things that are currently of interest in the field.
6.8   Unplug your toaster, and remove the cleanout plate so that you can inspect
      the heating element. Why does it get hot? Is it made of different materiai
      than its supports and the wires that supply it? Why? Carefully break open a
216    ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN




       light bulb and inspect its internal design. Why is it built the way it is?
       Unplug your electric dock and carefully remove the case. What does it say
       on the motor? Does the motor run slower when the lights dim? Write a brief
       account of what you bave learned about the electrical devices that you use
       at home.
 6.9   Climb up into your attic and explore the myriad of wires that supply
       electrical energy to various plugs and lights. Is there anything special about
       the doorbell system? Switch off the circuit breakers or remove the fuses in
       your house or apartment one at a time. Determine how your piace is wired.
       Are the lights and plugs on the same circuits? Do you have more plug
       circuits or light circuits? How much power can you draw on each circuit?
       Write a brief account describing what you have learned about the distribu-
       tion of electricity in your home.
6.10 Look over the electrical wiring in your automobile. What is the primary
       supply voltage? Is it ac or dc? Check the bulbs; does the same current flow
       through any two bulbs (does one go out when another is removed)? Where
       are the switches that contro! the various bulbs? What sort of repair con-
       veniences are employed in the wiring? What sort of electric motors and
       generators does your car employ? Your battery is marked with its capacity"
       in "ampere hours." Knowing the voltage, you can compute the tota! energy
       available from your battery. Compute the number of equivalent "engine
       seconds" at the advertised horsepower of your engine. Check the fuses in
       the electric circuit, and use this to estimate the current to your headlamps.
       Compute their power consumption in watts, and check this against any
       printed ratings. How long could your battery supply your headlights
       without recharging? Write a short description of the electrical energy
       system in your automobile and the things in it that you now feel competent
       to fix yourself.

To increase your independence
6.11   Borrow a copy of the "Mechanical Engineer's Handbook," and read the
       sections on power transmissions and distribution in the chapter on Electrical
       Engineering. Note in particular the materiai on the economics of different
       sorts of transmission systems. Then, visit your locai utility company and
       find out the details oftheir distribution system. Try to rationalize differences
       between the handbook recommendations and the realities of the locai
       system. Write a short description and analysis of your locai distribution
       system.
6.12   Read New Superconductors in Scientific American, November 1971, and
       Superconductors for Power Transmission in Scientific American, Aprii 1972.
       Contact one of the organizations cited as being active in the development
       of this technology, and find out where they stand. Then, write a short
       description of the idea and the outlook for the development of super-
       conducting transmission systems.
                                                                                        ... ..
                                                                                        ~ '.~




                                                    HOW ELECTRONS WORK           217



6.13   Visita factory that uses heavy machinery. Inspect the nameplates on the
       motors and generators that they use. Where do they use dc? How is the
       speed of the machines controlled? What voltages are available within
       the plant? What is the daily consumption of electrical energy? Estimate
       the energy used for lighting each day.
       Contact the utility company that supplies this plant, and find out the rate at
       which they are charged for electrical energy. Compare this with the rate
       for homeowners, and rationalize any difference. Write a short paper on the
       utilization of electrical energy in this plant. What would they do ifa federai
       order required them to reduce their consumption of electrical energy by
       10%? What does this experience suggest to you about the feasibility of a
       national policy to effect electrical energy conservation?
6.14 Go to your locai college library and scan the stack materiai on electrical
     energy. You will very likely find some interesting information on the
     electrical energy distribution systems in various countries. Write a paper
     summarizing the history and current status of the electrical energy "grid"
     in a country of your choice. How do the cultura! and politica! values of
     the country impact upon the distribution of electrical energy in that country?
6.15 Look up some recent articles on direct-energy-conversion devices in
     technical magazines and journals in your locai library. Choose one DEC
     device, and write a short paper tracing its development, current state-of-
     the-art, current activity, and the outlook for its utilization in the next
     20 years. What sorts ofbreakthroughs in the technology ofthe device might
     change the outlook dramatically? What "conventional" technology would
     be likely to be most seriously upset by such a breakthrough? Are there
     potential uses of the device that might be regarded as "weaponry" that
     bave either accelerated or impeded the development of the device?
ATOMSWORK
        HARDER


           In which we see
             thepowerof
      twentieth century alchemy




NUCLEAR ENERGETICS

In this chapter we will examine the science and technology of nuclear
energy. Let's begin by reviewing the basic picture of the atom and some
of the things that happen in the atomic world. Every atom consists of a
"nucleus," the very dense centrai core, and "electrons" that swirl some-
thing like planets atound the nucleus. Electrons are very light particles
with a negative charge; the number of electrons varies from element to
element, and this is what makes the elements different. The nucleus
contains positively charged particles called "protons"; although a proton
has the same magnitude of charge (but opposite sign) as an electron, the
proton is much heavier. The numbers of protons and electrons are

218
                                                ATOMS WORK HARDER        219



identical, and thus atoms are electrically neutral. The nucleus also con-
tains some electrically neutral particles called "neutrons" that have about
the same mass as protons. There are about the same number of neutrons
in the nucleus as protons. Two atoms with the same number of electrons
(and hence protons) but different numbers of neutrons are called "iso-
topes" of the same element. Since chemical reactions involve only elec-
trons, all the isotopes of a given element behave the same way chemically.
But they behave quite differently when nuclear reactions are involved,
and that is what this chapter is all about.
   The masses of the fundamental particles mentioned above have been
accurately measured; in terms of the atomic mass scale, which defines
the mass of the carbon atom 6 C 12 to be 12.0000 amu ("atomic mass
units"), these masses are

   Neutron       l .008665 amu
   Pro ton       1.007825 amu
   Electron      0.00055 amu

One amu is equivalent to l.66 x 10- 24 grams, and so you can see that
these particles are all very, very tiny. Let's check out the 6 C 12 atom,
which contain 6 protons, 6 neutrons (hence the mass number is 12), and
of course 6 electrons :

   Mass of 6 protons        6.04695
   Mass of 6 neutrons       6.05199
   Mass of 6 electrons      0.00330
    Total                  12.10224

Why does this not add up to 12.00000, as advertised? The reason is that
the mass of an object, which you remember measures its resistance to
acceleration, is not quite conserved. In other words, when you bring
the particles together to form the atom, the mass of the whole is not qui te
the same as the mass of the parts. However, a certain amount of energy
is released when the protons, neutrons, and electrons come together to
form the atom, and thanks to Dr. Einstein we can think of this energy
as taking away the mass; some ofthe mass was converted to energy. The
theory of relativity proposed by Einstein and subsequently tested experi-
mentally states that the energy E made available by the disappearance
of mass m is related to the speed of light by the famous equation

   E= mc 2                                                             (7.l)
220   ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN




Let's use this to compute the energy release upon formation of the 6 C 12
atom, which is called the "binding energy" of the "nuclide" (another
term for isotope). The mass defect is

   12.10224 - 12.00000 = 0.10224 amu

It will be convenient to find the energy equivalent of l amu. Since the
speed of light e is, in the cgs unit system,

   e = 3 x 10 10 cm/sec

the energy equivalent of l amu = 1.66 x 10- 24 grams is

   1.66 x 10- 24 grams x (3 x 10 10 cm/sec) 2
                                          =   1.49 x 10- 3 gram-cm 2 /sec 2

This will not mean much if you are not calibrated to energy in gram-cm 2 / •
sec 2 • It might help to know that "erg" is short for "gram-cm 2 /sec 2 ,"
and hence the energy equivalent of l amu is 1.49 x 10- 3 erg. About
10 10 ergs make a Btu, and so the binding energy of a carbon nucleus is
of the order of 0.15 x 10- 13 Btu ... not very much by comparison with
your daily needs. However, a thimbleful of carbon contains of the order
of 10 22 atoms, having a total binding energy of the order of 10 7 Btu!
So, the energy available from nuclear reactions is potentially enormous.
    In high-energy physics another energy unit is in very common use.
This is the "electron volt" (ev), which is equivalent to the energy ac-
quired by any particle carrying one electron's worth of charge when it
falls through a potential of one volt. One electron volt is equ~valent to

   l ev = 1.6 x 10- 12 erg

Since an erg is about 10- 10 Btu, an electron volt is about 1.6 x 10- 22
Btu ... not much at all, but then again there are an enormous number
of atoms here and there. In terms of electron volts, the energy equivalent
of one atomic mass unit is


   l amu       1.49 x 10- 3 erg = 0.931 x 109 ev
             1.6 x 10- 12 erg/ev

The notation "Mev" (million electron volts) is used, and so

   l amu = 931 Mev

                                                   )
                                              ATOMS WORK HARDER       221



The term Bev (billion electron volts) is used too, and you might easily
remember that I amu of mass is roughly equivalent to I Bev of energy.
So, when you read about a particle accelerator that produces 1-Bev
particles, you should realize that the energy equivalent of the mass of an
entire neutron is pumped into each accelerated particle.
   In the "normai" atoms the electrons are well behaved, each whirling
about in its proper orbit. However, collisions between atoms, even the
sort that arise when an element is heated in a flame, can "excite" one
or more electrons to higher than normai energy levels. One can think
of the electron "shifting to a higher orbit" as a result of taking on the
extra energy. Atoms in these excited states tend to be unstable, and the
electrons eventually fall back to their normai orbit. When they do,
the energy difference between the excited and normai level is emitted as
electromagnetic radiation, which can be thought of either as "waves"
or as a "photon particle." The frequency ofthe radiation is related to the
energy through "Planck's equation,"

   E= hv                                                             (7.2)

where h is Planck's constant, 6.62 x 10- 2 7 erg-sec, and v (the Greek
letter "nu") is the frequency of the radiation (cycles/sec). This has all
been deduced by physicists as a means for explaining the peculiar light-
emission characteristics of heated globs of different elements. Physicists
use measurements of the frequency to calculate the energy jump using
Eq. (7.2). Atoms that emit radiation as a result of electronic decay from
an excited state do not change mass significantly; all the energy released
comes from the excess kinetic energy of the electron.
   Radiation travels at the speed oflight c. lfyou imagine a wave passing
a point at this velocity (Fig. 7.1), you can see that the frequency v,
velocity e, and wavelength À. (Greek symbol "lambda") are related by.

        e
  V



So, high-frequency radiation will have a small (short) wavelength, and
low-frequency radiation will have a long wavelength. Returning to




                                    FIG. 7.1 RELATIO~SHIP BETWEEN
            O=c!A
               I
                                    FREOUENCY AND / AVELENGTH.
    222   ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN




    Eq. (7.2), we see that photons (quanta) of high-frequency radiation will
    be highly energetic. The energy per photon increases going from long
    radio waves to shorter light waves to very short x-rays to very, very short
    gamma rays. X-rays, for example, typically have energies of the order
    of a few tens of kev.
       Just as the electrons can exist in excited states, so can the nuclei.
    However, the energy required to raise a nucleus to an excited state is
    much greater than for electronic excitation. Energy jumps of the order of
     1 Mev are typical for lightweight nuclei. The excited nuclear states are
    very unstable, and the nucleus tends to return to the stable "ground"
    state in a small fraction of a second by emitting "hard" (high-energy or
    "gamma") photon radiation. The number ofneutrons and protons in the
    nucleus is unchanged, and so the isotope is not changed by the gamma
    emission.
        There are many nuclear reactions that do change the basic nature of
    the atom, and these constitute what is know as "radioactivity." Many
    nuclei, even some that occur "naturally" on earth, are unstable and change
    to some stable form by emission of some sort of particles. There are severa!
    different modes of radioactive decay, and these are usually grouped
    according to the nature of the emitted particles. In "alpha emission" the
    "particle" emitted consists of a cluster of two neutrons and two protons;
    this is just the nucleus of a helium atom, and the alpha particle is nothing
    more than a helium nucleus. This mode of decay is common for the heavy
    elements where the binding energies are lower, and is frequently ac-
    companied by gamma emission. Since the alpha particle carries off
    protons and neutrons, the basic nature of the atom is changed. An
    important example is the decay of plutonium,




    In writing equations describing nuclear reactions, it is customary to use
    the notation employed above. The fore-subscript (e.g., 94 for Pu) is the
    charge of the nucleus, i.e., the number of protons in the nucleus. The
\
    superscript (e.g., 239 for Pu) is the "mass number ," i.e., the sum of
~   the number of neutrons and protons in the nucleus. This notation makes
    balancing of nuclear particles very easy, since 94 = 2 + 92 and
    239 = 4 + 235. Moreover, anyone familiar with the basic isotopes can
    figure out right away what new elements will result from alpha emission
    of any element.
       Another important type of radioactivity involves emission of "beta"
    (P) particles from the nucleus. The beta particle is simply an e'ectron
    with positive charge ("positive beta") or negative charge ("nJgative
                                               ATOMS WORK HARDER        223



 beta"). Beta emission provides a mechanism for changes to occur in the
 charge of a nucleus without a change in mass. The result of a negative
 beta emission is that a neutron is effectively converted into a proton;
 scientists would describe this by

     on1 -+ -1eo + 1H1
    neutron   beta    proton


 Note that the subscript and superscripts both "balance" on the two sides
 of this nuclear-reaction equation. The positive beta particle is called
 a "positron," and the designated by 1 e0 • As an example of positron
 emission,



describes the decay of an unstable isotope of nitrogen to a stable form of
carbon.
   These are just some of the important nuclear reactions that occur
spontaneously. All these occur at the whim of the nucleus, some much
more rapidly than others. Statistica! studies of all sorts of radioactive
decays indicate that the number of decays that occur in a small time
interval is proportional to the number of radioactive atoms that are
present at that time. Thus, if lit denotes time interval and - !in the
decrease in the number of radioactive atoms over this time interval, the
"radioactive-decay law" is

    -!in
         = an
     lit

where a is a constant that depends upon the decay reaction. Ifyou know
a little calculus, you will be able to solve this equation for the limiting
case of very small time changes, and thereby obtain an expression for the
number of radioactive atoms present as a function of time,

                                                                      (7.3)

 Here n0 is the number present initially when t = O, and e is the math-
 ematician's special number 2.71828. Figure 7.2 shows the form of this
 "exponential decay law" that applies to all radioactivity. The time scale
 for the decay could be quantified by giving the value for the c~nstant a.
\However, it is common practice instead to deal with the "half-~e" ofthe
 decay, defined as the time required for halfthe atoms to decay from their
224   ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN




n
no




                                           FIG. 7.2   RADIOACTIVE-DECAY LAW.


 radioactive or excited state. The half-life is designated as t 112 in Fig. 7.2.
 Half-lives vary from fractions of a second to billions of years. For example,
 the much-discussed product of nuclear weapons, Sr 90 (Strontium 90),
 has a half-life of about 20 years. So, strontium 90 deposited into the
 earth's atmosphere as a result of a nuclear war would be only half gone
after 20 years, i gone after 40 years, t gone after 60 years, and all this
time would be emitting high-energy radiation as atom-by-atom it decays.
The longer the half-life, the longer radioactive atoms are around, and the
more slowly they decay. Radiation damage is dependent upon the
intensity of radiation, and a slowly decaying isotope will emit relatively
slowly. So, naturally occurring U 238 , which has a half-life of4.5 x 10 9
years, decays so slowly that its radiation is not at all harmful by compar-
ison with other radioactive materials around.
    The earth has been around long enough that the elements with short
half-lives have decayed away, leaving only those with long half-lives and
those which are "stable." The nuclear arrangements for stable nuclei
are shown in Fig. 7.3. It is remarkable that these forma nai:row band,
with the light elements having about the same number of neutrons as
protons, and the heavier elements having progressively more neutrons
than protons.
    In addition to spontapeous (radioactive) nuclear reactions there are
many reactions that occur when nuclear particles collide. For example,
in a nuclear reactor neutrons, betas, and gammas are flying around
every which way, continually colliding and reacting with the nuclei of
stationary atoms of a variety of elements. The details of the reaction
depend upon the energy of the approaching particle and the directness
with which it strikes the nucleus. The energy of the 2.pproaching particle
is easy to quantify, but the directness ofthe impact is not, and so one thinks
of "probabilities" of certain things happening as a result of th~ion;
this statistica! approach avoids the problem of dealing with the impact
more precisely. The most important nuclear reactions are listed thus:
                                                                ATOMS WORK. HARDER                 225



      160   :I-- -T - ---!-~-- ---T-------~--f
                                      ,                  I          I
                                      I                  '          I
      140 ~ ____ __;_ ___ _J__ ____i _____--+---<ll'-----1
            I


      120

~
 I

~ 1oo t--- -         ----+----- -----+- ---------~------        -·---f-----·-··---··----·.ol


L
(1)
.n
 E                                                                                         I
e
e
 -,
       80 i-
            l                         1----                                    --1
oL                                    !
+
GJ                                                                                         !
       60                                                               -----------j
z


       40                                     ··--·---·-!.-
                                                                      , --------1I
                                                              - · - --r----

                                                                           -~-~Il
                                                        '           I
                                                        i           i
       20                          --!            -··--+~-----·--·--1--
                                                        1           '
                                                        I
                                                        j          Ii
                                                        ii         I
        o               _l_______ j                     .          i
                                                                   L_

            o           20         40                60          80                     100
                               Proton number,Z
FIG. 7.3 NEUTRON-PROTON PLOT OF STABLE NUCLIDE$ (INCLUDES RADIO-
NUCLIDES WITH HALF-LIVES GREATER THAN 1.000 YEARS).



      Scattering:
         Neutron hits nucleus and glances off at a reduced speed; nucleus
         is set in motion, perhaps excited, but otherwise unaffected.

      Abso_rption:                                                                             /
         Neutron (usually slow) is captured by the nucleus, whiéh then
         "decays" by emission.
226   ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN




   Fission:
      Neutron "splits" the nucleus into two light nuclei, forming two
      lighter atoms (often radioactive).
   Fusion:
      Deuteron particle (proton plus neutron) is captured and a proton
      or neutron is emitted.

Figure 7.4 depicts examples of these four important types of nuclear
reactions. There are others that occur in nuclear reactors and fusion
power experiments, and you can read about these on your own.

                                                             ( l Nucleus
                                                          /\...__) fra9ment
                                                        //         --
                                      -·-··-~--------'"----~\, -~-(0

                                                             lr \Nucleus
                                                                  fragment
                                                                ,..J'

                                                          (e)




FIG. 7.4 SCHEMATICS OF NUCLEAR
REACTIONS. (a) SCATTERING,
(b) ABSORPTION, (e) FISSION.
(d) FUSION.


   The various possibilities for nuclear reaction are usually ·expressed in
terms of the "cross sections" for the various events. This arises from
experiments in nuclear physics where the approaching particle is assumed
to have negligible size and the probability for a particular reaction is
treated as being proportional to the projected area of the target nucleus.
Figure 7.5 shows a simple model used in the conception ofthe cross section.
A beam of particles with intensity / 0 (number per second per square
centimeter) impinges upon a target with thickness t. Some of the ap-
proaching particles collide with target atoms; others do not. The ones
that come through unscathed make up a weaker beam with intensity /.
Experiments (and theory of a more sophisticated nature) show that the
emerging and incident beams may be related by

                                                                        (7.4)
                                                  ATOMS WOR~ HARDER         227




Incident
 beam
                        1--<-··-r·----l
FIG. 7.5 THE "CROSS SECTION" DETERMINES THE PROBABILITY OF COLLISION
OF PARTICLES IN THE INCIDENT BEAM.


where N is the number of target atoms per cubie centimeter, and <T (the
lowercase Greek letter "sigma") is the "cross section" for the particular
sort of collision being studied. The product <JNt is dimensionless; <T has
the dimensions of area, usually expressed in cm 2 • Since large nuclei have
diameters ofthe order of 10- 12 cm, it is not surprising that <T is typically
of the order of 10- 24 cm 2 • It has become commonplace to defìne l
"barn" as 10- 24 cm 2 , and now cross sections are normally stated in
barns.
    When a neutron beam strikes a target, severa! things happen. There
will be some fìssions, there will be some scattering, there will be some
absorption, and some neutrons will get through without collision. Each
of these reactions has its own cross section, and the intensity of the beam
that emerges without collisions of any sort is again given by Eq. (7.4),
with <T replaced by the total cross section, i.e., the sum of the cross sections
for the various possible reactions,

   <Ttot   = <Tfis + <Tabs + <Tscat                                       (7.5)

The probability of each type of reaction upon collision is given by· the
ratio of the cross section for that reaction to the tota! cross section, e.g.,

             <Tfis
   Pfls=-                                                                 (7.6)
             <Ttot


   The values of the cross sections depend upon the nature and energy
ofthe incident particle. Figure 7.6 shows the tota! cross section for natural
uranium, as measured experimentally. The high peaks are due to high-
absorption cross sections for neutrons of particular energies by the isotope
U 238 • We will referto this curve later to explain why U 238 is removed
from natural uranium in the preparation of nuclear-reactor fuels.
   The product of a fìssion reaction depends upon the manner in which
the neutron strikes the nucleus. Again a statistica! approach is used to
     228    ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN




           100
     !!]
     t
     B
     t
            10




                             10               100             1000             10,000
                                             E, ev
     FIG. 7.6    TOTAL CROSS SECTION OF NATURAL URANIUM.

l
"'   avoid having to deal with this precisely. Figure 7. 7 shows the fission-
     product yield from the fission ofU 23 ~ by slow ("thermal") neutrons. The
     curve shows the percentage of each sort of nuclide that is yielded in a large
     number of fission reactions. The fission tends to produce one particle with
     a mass number around 140 and another with a mass number around 95
     (140 + 95 = 235 as required to balance the nuclear reaction), and only
     very infrequently are particles with significantly different mass numbers
     produced by the fission reaction. Curves such as this have been measured
     for many fissionable isotopes, and they generally take the same shape.
        When a fission reaction occurs, the nucleus is split into two fragments
     of lower mass number. These nuclides will have a greater neutron-
     proton ratio than the stable nuclei (see Fig. 7.3), and hence will be
     radioactive. So, they decay by emission of excess neutrons and other
     radioactive-decay reactions. Most of the neutrons are emitted within
     10- 12 sec after fission; these are called the "prompt" n,eutrons. Less than
     1 % are "delayed" in their emission, but these are still very important in
     nuclear reactors. The number of neutrons emitted depends on the
     particular "fission fragments" that happen to split out of the original
     atom. On the average, U 235 fissions produce about 2.5 neutrons per
                                                                              ATOMS WORK HARDER         229



        10 ~.::r--=L. ~-
             '--




                       t +-'- -- '--- --
             1--IJ-.4.>--~-··-                                  ·-411--+-+--I---- -        -    A-
             ' ·- r--'--f--t-                                      --Thermal                      •


      0.01
                                 ! !
             ~:m::::;:=::i:'=:i=::j:::::. I -
                                                       '"JI     --=t=:t:=:it=t=±=::t:::t'itj
                                                           .:-'- . .
                                                 ··-   -- 1--


             i--~--1-~--·~ -~~T=f= ~~ ~~ :~~ ~--·-:__ -~~-- :_- -~. !. =- - ~_. -·___J._..__...__~__,
             l--~-1-1---i-_ .+---i-i--l--1-- --···· ·--i~-i---l----1.---1---1---1-~
                      i I        I
    0.001 '        ' -i    i. !




                                                Mass number A
 FIG. 7.7 FISSION-PRODUCT YIELD FROM U 2 35 BY 14 MEV AND THERMAL
 NEUTRONS.


  fission. It is this excess of output neutrons over input neutrons that permits
  the nuclear reactor to stay "self-supporting." The energy of the prompt-
  fission neutrons varies markedly, depending upon the particular decays
  involved. Most of the neutrons are emitted with energies of the order of
  1 to 5 Mev. The delayed neutrons tend to be less energetic, and this is
  very important in the control of nuclear reactors, as we shall see.
      The fission reaction releases energy in a variety of ways. The total
· energy emission per fission ofa U 235 atom is about 200 Mev. Most ofthis
  (167 Mev) is in the form of kinetic energy of the fission fragments, the
  rest being largely radioactive-decay energy and kinetic energy of the
  neutrons. The kinetic energy of the fission fragments is ultimately trans-
  ferred to other atoms by collisions, with the result that the whole thing
230 ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN



gets hot. In a bomb thingsjust keep getting hotter and hotter, while in a
nuclear reactor a coolant is provided to maintain the fuel at a fixed
operating temperature. Measurements of the thermal energy produced
per fission ofU 235 indicate about 175 Mev, suggesting that about 8 Mev
is produced by collisions of particles other than the primary-fission
fragments.
   We have outlined the basic aspects of nuclear reactions that we need
to develop some understanding of nuclear energy, and will now tum to
some of the practical aspects of nuclear power technology.


NUCLEAR POWER REACTORS
    In the previous section we described the process of nuclear fission, in
which a neutron striking the nucleus of a fissionable atom breaks the
nucleus into two lighter pieces that subsequently decay radioactively by
throwing off some neutrons. Some of these neutrons will be "captured"
by atoms that they strike; others will cause new fissions of atoms. The_
reaction is said to be "critical" when there is exactly one new fission for
each old one; the reaction is then a "chain" reaction. In a critical con-
dition the fission rate and hence energy release per unit time is constant,
and thus a steady-state source of energy is provided. The fission products
collide with stationary atoms, giving up their kinetic energy, and this
increases the temperature ofthe fuel materia!. So, ifa coolant is provided,
energy can be transferred continually to the coolant as heat, and this
energy then can be used in a fluid power system of the sort discussed in
Chap. 4. The power output from a nuclear reactor can be controlled by
controlling the number of neutrons flying about within. This controls
the number offission reactions, and hence the "reactor thqmal power."
This is the basic idea ofnuclear power as it is known today.
    In order to achieve criticality, enough neutrons must be produced by
each old fission to produce at least one new fission. We say "at least"
because in the process of bringing the reactor up to operating power
there must be an excess of new fissions so that the power level can rise
continuously. If the excess is too great, the power will increase too
rapidly, and the reactor becomes a nuclear bomb. Reactors are of course
designed such that it is impossible for the power-rise rates used in bombs
to occur, but start-up still is a phase of operation that must be done very
carefully by a trained operator. As with airplanes, the "take-off" is the
most dangerous moment in the operation of a nuclear reactor.
    The heavy atoms (those with high mass number) are best suited for
fission reactions because their fission fragments will have a relatively
                                                              ATOMS WORK !+ARDER   231



large excess of neutrons to release upon radioactive decay. The isotopes
U 235 , U 233 , Pu 239 , and Pu 241 (Pu stands for plutonium) are commonly
used because they have long half-lives and produce a number of neutrons
upon fission. The uranium isotopes are abundant naturally, and the
plutonium isotopes can be created from uranium in a "breeder" reactor.
It is impossible to establish a chain reaction in natural uranium because
the U 2 3 8 captures too many of the neutrons that otherwise could cause
fissions of U 235 (see Fig. 7.6). Figure 7.8 shows the fission cross section
for U 235 at relatively low neutron energies. Note that the fission cross
section is higher at low energies; consequently it is much easier to fission
U 235 with "slow" neutrons than "fast" ones (the neutron is around the
nucleus longer and has a better chance to score). These considerations
suggest that one should try to establish a critica! chain reaction by re-
moving some of the U 2 3 8 to eliminate its undesirable neutron capture,
and then somehow slow down the neutrons so that they will have a
high probability of causing fissions when they strike U 235 nuclei. This
was indeed the approach used in the early days of reactor development.
We will mention some newer concepts shortly.

                                                                   1 'TTITll




                                                                          j
                                                                           I
                                                                          j

                                                                          ~
uQ)
 lf)




             j::                                                         ~J
 e                                                                        j
             ~
 o                                                                            !
-~
u:::                                                                     1
             i
       101   L__ j_ ___LLLlw.L____   j ___..LLLLLLIL........J..
                                                                  ._u_u_j
         0.01                  0.1                    1                  10
                           Neutron ener9y,ev
FIG. 7.8           FISSION CROSS SECTIONS FOR U235 AT LOW ENERGIES.
232   ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN




     How can one slow down neutrons without losing them by capture?
 One needs a materia! with a high scattering cross section and a low
 capture cross section; the scattering results in transfer of kinetic energy
 from the neutrons to the scattering atoms, and this slows down the
 neutrons and agitates the scattering atoms. Eventually an equilibrium
 condition is obtained in which some neutrons gain energy and others
 lose energy when they strike the agitated scattering atoms. In this con-
 dition there is no longer any net transfer of energy between the neutrons
 and the atoms, and they are "in thermal equilibrium." So, neutrons that
have been slowed to this leve! are called "thermal" neutrons. It is the
thermal neutrons that one wants to use to cause U 235 fissions. Can you
guess which atoms are best for the job of slowing down or "moderating"
neutrons? If you have ever played marbles, you know that a small
marble keeps most of its energy when colliding with a large one, and is
most effective in giving its energy to another marble when the two marbles
are about the same size. So, a good moderator atom should have about the
same mass as a neutron. Therefore, hydrogen, the lightest atom, makes
the best moderator, and water has been used as a moderator in marty
reactors. "Heavy water," which has the hydrogen isotope 1 H 2 instead
of the more abundant form 1 H1, has also been used because of its lower
capture cross section. Water and graphite are the primary moderators
in use today.
     In order to make efficient use of the neutrons that are available in a
reactor, they must not be allowed to escape. So, a nuclear reactor is
surrounded by a "shield" that does two things. First, it is designed to
reftect as many neutrons as possible back into the reactor core; and second,
it is designed to capture those neutrons that cannot be reftected to prevent
them from coming out into the environment. A thin layer of heavy atoms
is sometimes used for the reftecting job, and then a thick blanket of
hydrogen-rich materia! is used for the outer shield. The hydrogen is
good because escaping neutrons lose most of their energy in a collision
with a hydrogen atom and then are more easily captured when they
collide with a heavier atom, such as lead or even oxygen. Concrete,
which contains both light and heavy atoms, is usually used for shielding
in large centra! power station reactors.
    Since no shielding is perfectly reftecting, some neutrons will always
be lost. The neutron leakage increases in proportion to the reactor surface
area, i.e., to the square of the reactor diameter. However, the number of
fissionable atoms increases as the volume of the reactor, which of course is
proportional to the cube of the diameter. So, by making the reactor large
enough, a "critica!'' situation can be obtained. Reactors, and bombs,
have "critica! masses" below which they just will not go critical. Indeed,
                                               ATOMS WORK. HARDER      233



 one of the safety features of power reactors is that they are built with a
 limited amount of fissionable material so that they are only barely able
 to go critical, quite unlike a bomb.
    Now imagine that you are a nuclear-reactor engineer. You have some
 fuel, understand the need for moderation, and have solved your shielding
 problem. How are you going to control the number of fission reactions
 and hence vary the reactor power during operation? ... (the dots
represent your thinking about it fora few minutes). One way would be
 to change the amount offuel in the reactor core; but the fuel will be hot
 and hard to handle, and the AEC (Atomic Energy Commission) safety
guys aren't about to let you control your reactor this way. Another way
would be to vary the amount of moderator present; for example, you
could move some graphite in and out of the core, thereby controlling the
number of thermal neutrons ftying about. The trouble with this is that
you reduce the reactor power by increasing the number of fast neutrons,
and in an emergency you could very likely be increasing the radiation
hazard when you are trying to shut down the reactor. The AEC would
not be very fond of this either ... (back to the drawing boards). How
about inserting or withdrawing a material that loves to capture neutrons?
Now to increase the power, you gingerly withdraw your "control rod,"
thereby allowing the number of neutrons to build up slowly, and then
you can push the rod back in a ways to hold the neutron population
at the level required for the desired reactor power. At last ... you have
invented a safe scheme for reactor control ! And if you make things "fail-
safe," so that if anything goes wrong the control rods fall into the core
by gravity, thereby shutting things off automatically, and do a good job
in your engineering, the AEC just might grant you an operation permit
and supply you with nuclear fuel.
    Now you should have a fairly complete picture ofthe basic features of a
nuclear power reactor; fissionable material, appropriately enriched with
U 235 by removal of U 238 ; a moderator to produce slow neutrons;
shielding to minimize neutron escape and protect the public; and a
"poison" type of control system designed to be supersafe. You allow the
neutron population in the reactor to build up, and. then hold it at the
desired operating level. The energy released by the fission is converted
to internal energy in the reactor core, and you take this energy out with
the reactor coolant. The hot ftuid is then worked over in a ftuid energy-
conversion system designed with due regard for public safety.
    As the nuclear reaction goes on, the amount of fissionable material
in the core gradually decreases. The control rods gradually are moved
out of the core to maintain the reactor power as this process of "burnup"
goes on. Eventually the fuel will be depleted to the point where the fuel
234   ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN




elements must be removed and replaced with new elements containing
a higher percentage of fissionable materia!. The old plates are then
 processed to remove as much fissionable materia! as possible, and then
disposed of in some manner that is appropriate to their degree of radio-
activity. Commercia! power reactors are shut down for partial refueling
and maintenance about once each year. The replacement of the entire
reactor core thus extends over a period of severa! years, and in reality is
always going on, much like the painting operation on the Golden Gate
Bridge.
    Severa! different types of coolants have been used in power reactors.
The "boiling-water reactor" (BWR) has become the workhorse of the
commercia! power industry. Recalling that water is a good moderator,
you can see that if the boiling produces too much steam, the number of
moderating hydrogen atoms in the core will go down (steam is less dense
than liquid water, remember); this in turn will reduce the number of
slow neutrons in the core, and hence will reduce the fission rate and reactor
power. When combined with poison-type contro! rods, good and safe
contro! is provided. Typically the water ftow is only partially vaporized.
in the reactor, and the liquid is recirculated back through the reactor
after the steam has been removed. The steam can, in principle, be fed
directly to a steam turbine. But unfortunately this sort of power plant
does not have good load-following capabilities; as the turbine load in-
creases, the turbine starts to slow down, and the turbine speed contro!
then asks the reactor for more steam by opening a valve between the
reactor and turbine. But this tends to drop the reactor pressure, allowing
steam within the reactor to expand, thereby increasing the "void space"
in the water moderator and thus reducing the reactor power. The contro!
rods must work hard to overcome the resulting loss of moderator. To get
around this problem, boiling-water reactors often bypass a µortion of the
ftow around the turbine, "dissipating" the available energy in the bypass
steam by pressure drop through a valve. Then, when the turbine asks
for more steam, the bypass ftow is simply diverted to the turbine, and the
reactor continues to operate as if nothing had happened. But this scheme
is very wasteful of available energy, and so in practice is used only for
small "load trimming." A still better way to contro! the plant output is to
change the recirculating-water ftow rate, and this approach is becoming
more common in new nuclear power systems.
    The fuel elements in BWRs are typically tubes of corrosion-resistant
metal filled with enriched uranium oxide. The tubes are arranged in a
"fuel bundle" through which the water ftows vertically upward along the
tubes. Spacers are used to maintain proper spacing between the fuel rods
and thus to prevent the formation of undesirable "hot spots" which could
                                               ATOMS WORK HARDER        235




                                   (a)




                                         (b)
FIG. 7.9 BOILING-WATER-REACTOR
SYSTEMS. (a) DIRECT SYSTEM.
(b) DUAL CYCLE SYSTEM.


lead to premature failure of the fuel rod. The rod bundles form "sub-
assemblies" that are inserted into the core in a matrix style. The neutron
population in the center of the reactor core is higher, and hence the fuel
bundles in the center of the core normally are lòaded with less fissionable
materia! (lower enrichment) in an attempt to provide uniform power
output across the reactor. Figure 7.9 shows some alternative plumbing
schemes for BWR reactors. Figure 7.1 Oshows some details of a commercia!
BWR.
                                                  Steam dryer

                                               -Steam outlet

                                             -- Stcarn separator


                                             --·· Feedwater lnlet




                                             -·-· Fue! bund !.es

                                             -··- Confrol rod

                                                  Pressure vessel




                                                  Shie!d




                                              -· Control rod drives




FIG. 7.10 THE   BWR/6   SYSTEM.   COURTESY   OF    THE     GENERAL ELECTRIC
COMPANY.

236
                                               ATOMS WORK HARDER       237



    Another type of water-coole_d reactor is the "pressurized-water
reactor" (PWR), in which the water is maintained at a high pressure to
prevent bulk boiling and the accompanying formation of large-scale
vapor "voids." The reactor pressure is typically 2,000 psia, and the liquid
water leaves the reactor at temperatures around 560°F. This hot water is
used to boil steam in a secondary circulation system, for use in a steam
turbine. Alternatively, the water fiow from the reactor can be passed
through a valve, which drops the pressure and "fiashes" some of the
liquid to vapor. The PWR, which was developed initially as a concept
in the U.S. Naval Submarine Reactor Program, has now become one
of the important reactor types in the commercia! nuclear power industry.
Figure 7.11 shows some typical PWR plumbing arrangements.




Reactor




                                          Feed(vater
                                          heaters
FIG. 7.11   TYPICAL PWR SYSTEM.



    The load-following capability of a PWR derives from the expansion
and contraction of the water with temperature. As the turbine load in-
creases, valves are actuated, with the effect that the reactor inlet water
becomes colder and more dense. This increases its ability to moderate the
fast neutrons, and hence the slow-neutron population increases, in-
creasing the reactor power. The contro! rods are then used mainly to
compensate for long-term changes in the neutron density due to "fuel
burnup" and "fission-product poisoning." The converse effect is that an
increase in temperature expands the water, reducing its ability to moderate
fast neutrons and hence reducing the population of slow neutrons and
therapy reducing the reactor power. Thus, the PWR has a large "negative
238   ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN




temperature coefficient," meaning that a large negative change in slow-
neutron population is produced by positive changes in temperature.
This has obvious safety features which are fully capitalized upon in the
engineering of such reactors. For example, the Shippingport PWR once
had a coolant-flow failure during which the "scram rods" (control rods
that are shot into the reactor to reduce the slow-neutron population in
case of emergency) were not activated. The reactor showed only a slight
increase of pressure and a slow drift upward in temperature that was
easily corrected by insertion of the main control rods.
    A disadvantage of the PWR and BWR systems is that the working
fluid is water. This presents corrosion problems, and in addition limits
the maximum working-fluid temperature at tolerable pressures. Another
concept, the "gas-cooled reactor" (GCR), gets around these problems by
using a gas such as carbon dioxide, helium, or nitrogen as the working
fluid. The gas heated in the reactor may be used directly in the power-
conversion cycle, or else used to heat the working-cycle gas. Figure 7.12
shows these possibilities schematically. In either case the reactor basically
plays the role of the combustion chamber in the Brayton cycle (see Chap .•
4). Alternatively, the hot-reactor outflow could be used to generate
steam in a secondary heat exchanger, which then replaces the boiler in
a conventional steam power plant.
    In a GCR graphite is used as the moderator. The fuel may be mixed
with the moderator, but more often they are kept separate for metal-
lurgica! and servicing reasons. The fuel elements are typically bundles of
tubes filled with slightly enriched uranium oxide. Since the convective
heat-transfer coefficient for gas flow is typically considerably less than for
liquid flow (the molecules are further apart and thus less able to soak up
energy from the heated surfaces), large temperature differences between
the fuel elements and the gaseous coolant are typical in GCRs. In some
designs this is reduced by the addition of heat-conducting fins, in the
spirit of the fins on automobile radiators.
    Other fluids that have been used in experimental and commerciai
nuclear reactors include liquid metals such as sodium or an organic
liquid such as terphenyl. The advantage of the organic liquids is a low
vapor pressure at a high temperature. The advantage of liquid metals
is the high convective heat-transfer coefficients that they afford. In these
reactor systems the coolant is used to heat the cycle working fluid (usually
steam) in a closed power cycle. The liquid-metal reactors require a
separate moderator such as graphite. Since organic fluids contain hydro-
carbon molecules, their hydrogen atoms can do the moderating in
qrganic-cooled reactors.
         Reactor
                                                   Reactor
                      Gas




 Water
             Cooling
              water

                                                 Cooling air
                            Pump                  or water
                   (a)                                   (b)
                                     Reactor




                                   Coolin9 air
                                    or water
                                       (e)

FIG. 7.12 GAS-COOLED-REACTOR
SCHEMATICS. (a) THE INDIRECT
CLOSED CYCLE, GAS TO WATER.
(b) THE DIRECT CLOSED CYCLE,
(e) THE INDIRECT CLOSED CYCLE.
GAS TO GAS.




                                                               239
240   ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN




    Other experimental "liquid-fueled reactors" (LFR) in which the
nuclear fuel is actually carried with a liquid coolant have been built.
In these systems the fuel is carried in a liquid as small particles or is
actually dissolved into the carrier coolant. The reactor is simply a large
bulge in the coolant-circulation loop where enough fissionable materia!
is concentrated to produce a critica! mass. There are many technological
problems that remain to be solved with LFRs, and it is not clear that they
will ever compete with the BWR, PWR, and GCR as mainstays of the
commercia! nuclear power industry.


BREEDER REACTORS
    Earlier we mentioned that some isotopes of uranium are more easily
fissioned than others, and that U 2 3 8 , the most abundant naturally
occurring form, does not fission at all (it is "fertile"). However, one of
the reactions that can occur in a reactor is the nonfission capture of a
neutron by a U 2 3 8 nucleus, which produces a series of reactions culminat-
ing in the conversion of the nucleus to a fissionable form of plutonium, •
Pu239.




The capture first produces U 2 3 9 and gamma radiation. The U 2 3 9 decays
radioactively with a half-life of 24 min to a radioactive isoto.pe of nep-
tunium, which in turn decays with a half-life of2.3 days to the fissionable
plutonium. The two decay reactions release negative beta particles. This
process is called "conversion"; it produces a long-lived atom of fissionable
materia! from an atom of fertile materia!. There are other conversion
reactions, but this is perhaps the most important one.
   Some fissionable plutonium is produced by the chance reactions de-
scribed above in any nuclear reactor. In some cases this is retrieved from
spent fuel and then used in other reactors. In fact, "converter" reactors
have been built just for the purpose of plutonium production. It is even
possible to convert more atoms than are consumed in the fission reactions
that produce the neutrons. A reactor in which more fissionable nuclei
are produced than consumed is called a "breeder" reactor. The breeder
reactor literally produces more atoms of fissionable materia! than are


                 ...
                                                  ATOMS WORK HARDER        241



 used in the fission reactions ! Breeder reactors therefore provide a way
 to make more complete use of uranium ore, and obviously are going to
 have an enormous impact upon the nuclear power industry.
     The breeding reactions given above are most effective when the reactor
 is populated with very energetic ("fast") neutrons. In a fast breeder
 reactor the chain reaction is maintained with fast neutrons having an
 average energy of around I Mev by fission of U 235 and Pu 239 • These
 fissions produce sufficient neutrons to maintain the fission reaction and
 enough extra neutrons to convert U 238 to additional Pu 239 . Slow breeder
 reactors, which use thermal neutrons to convert a fertile isotope of
 thorium to fissionable U 2 3 3 , are also possible, and both types of breeders
 are now operating experimentally. However, the major breeder-reactor
 development effort is being concentrated on fast breeder reactors.
     Fast breeder reactors do not need to have many slow neutrons around,
 and so they do not use a moderator. This means that water cannot be
 used as the coolant, and instead gases or Iiquid metals must be used. A
 breeder reactor will have an additional component, the "blanket,"
which may surround the reactor core between the fuel and the shielding
or may be spread throughout the reactor. The materiai that is to be con-
verted is placed in this blanket and is retrieved after the conversion has
 taken piace. The rate of breeding is measured by the "doubling time"
of the reactor, the time required for conversion of twice as many fertile
atoms to fissionable atoms as have been consumed by fissions during the
breeding process. At the end of one doubling period a breeder reactor
has produced enough fissionable materiai to refuel itself and in addition
fuel another reactor! It appears that 7- to 10-year doubling periods will
be typical for efficient commerciai breeder reactors.
     Slow reactors have the desirable safety feature that, because of the
negative temperature coefficient, they are self-regulating; that is, they
are designed to self-compensate immediately for unintentional increase
in reactor power. However, in a fast reactor the expansion of the coolant
as a result of overheating can lead to an increase in reactor power,
which in turn increases the overheating. This unstable condition is
fortunately offset by the fact that the jittering motion of hot atoms in the
fuel plates affects the ability of th_eir nuclei to capture fast neutrons. This
is viewed as a "Doppler" effect, since it relates to the relative speeds of the
nuclei and neutrons. The net effect is that the U 2 3 8 capture rate increases
with increased temperature, and this helps reduce the number of fast
neutrons as the temperature increases. The reactor can be designed so
that the Doppler mechanism overrides the effect of coolant expansion,
with the net result that the reactor power will decrease as the temperature
increases, as desired for safe and stable operation.
242   ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN




    At the present time there is considerable interest in helium-cooled fast
breeder reactors, and at least one commercia! reactor of this type is now
under construction. The hot helium is used to boil steam in a separate
heat exchanger, and the steam is then used in a conventional power
cycle. The use of gaseous helium coolant is motivated by its low rate of
neutron moderation and capture in comparison with liquid-metal
coolants, by its inert chemical nature (in contrast to the corrosive nature
of li quid metals), and by the fact that the helium does not become radio-
active and hence does not pose a safety threat should it leak from the
reactor. We are now in the very early stages of nuclear power develop-
ment. Looking ahead, it seems very clear that some mix of breeder
reactors, slow reactors, and converters will be needed to provide the
optimum use of nuclear energy resources at a tolerable cost.


RADIOISOTOPE ENERGY SOURCES

   The first nuclear energy sources to operate in space were "radio-
isotope" devices. These devices do not contain a self-sustaining chain •
reaction but instead utilize the energy released by slow radioactive decay.
The particles released by the decay collide with stationary atoms, in-
creasing the temperature of the assembly. Energy is then extracted from
the assembly as heat and converted to electricity, usually in a thermo-
electric generator of the type discussed in Chap. 6. For example, the
SNAP lOA power system had a radioisotope power source with a thermal
output of35 kw and an electrical output of0.58 kw (you can compute the
system efficiency). Heat was removed from the reactor by a liquid-metal
coolant known as "NaK,'' a mixture ofsodium and potassium. The NaK
carried the energy to the thermoelectric converters, which were arranged
in panels along the skin of the space vehicle. Only a small portion of the
reactor power was converted to electrical energy, and the rest (the "waste
heat") was radiated away from the vehicle by the hot skin. Figure 7.13
shows some details of this system.
   A number of other isotopie power sources have been built for space use.
The SNAP 27 placed in operation on the moon by Apollo astronauts
uses the decay ofplutonium 238 and produces around 70 watts ofpower.
The plutonium decays with a half-life of 86 years, and the design life
of the power system is 1 year. Other isotopes with shorter half-lives are
of interest because they afford higher energy output for a given system
weight. For example, curium 242, with a half-life of only 183 days, offers
a power density of around 1,000 watts/gram of materia!, considerably
more than the 7 watts/gram available from the slower decay of Pu 2 3 8 •
The SNAP 11 system used this curium isotope on a moon probe for which
a 90-day system life was quite adequate.
                                                  ATOMS WORK HARDER        243



                                                            r··Therrnoelectric.
                                                            ' pump
                                                   ~~~




                                                        \~Reactor




                                 -------Lower Na.K manifold

                                 ----Instrumentation
                                   compnrtme nt
FIG. 7.13   THE SNAP 10A REACTOR.




     Devices that convert the nuclear radiation energy directly to electrical
 energy are also being developed. These are not heat engines and hence
 are not limited by the Carnot efficiency, although their practical effi-
 ciencies are very low. They are capable of producing very small amounts
 of power for a long time, and will undoubtedly be used for such things
 as cardiac pacemakers. The "betacel" captures beta particles emitted by
 isotope decay. These devices operate at around 1 volt. In the "fission
 electric cell" charged fission fragments move across a vacuum to a collector
 plate, giving the plate a strong positive charge. Electrons can then be
 pulled around through an external circuit to the collector plate. The
 fission fragments have a very large fraction of the energy released by the
 radioactive decay, and they carry a large number (around 80) ofpositive
_charges; so the fission electric cell tends to be a very high voltage device.
 With further research and development, devices like these may be
 developed to the point where th~y have some commercial application.


FUSION POWER
   Fission is a nuclear reaction in which a nuclei is split into lighter
elements. In contrast, "fusion" is a nuclear reaction in which two light
particles unite to form a heavier atom. Fusion reactions provide the
primary source ofthe sun's energy, and the great hope ofthe future as the
ultimate energy source for man.
244    ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN




   The particular fusion reactions that can be made to occur in a fusion
reactor include

       D + D --+ T + n + 3.2 Mev                                     (7.7a)

       D + D --+ T + p + 4.0 Mev                                     (7. 7b)

       D + T --+ He 4 + n + 17.6 Mev                                 (7.7c)

   D   + He 3 --+ He 4 + p + 18.3 Mev                                (7.7d)

Here D stands for the deuteron or deuterium nucleus ( 1 H 2 ), a heavy
isotope of hydrogen, T stands for a triton or tritium nucleus ( 1 H 3 ), a
rarer and heavier hydrogen isotope, p is proton, n is neutron, and the
energies refer to the kinetic energies of ejected particles. These reactions
can be made to occur by slamming the reacting nuclei together at very
high velocity. The high-speed impact is needed to overcome the strong
repulsive forces between the like charges of the positively charged nuclei. •
Such impacts will occur naturally if the gas containing the reactants is
hot enough. Unfortunately this requires temperatures that are hard to
imagine, temperatures of the order of 400 million °K ! Such a "temper-
ature" cannot be measured with mercury-in-glass thermometers, but
instead is defined in terms of the kinetic energy of the particles. The
average kinetic energy of a particle in a simple gas is related to the gas
temperature by

   E= tkT                                                             (7.8)

where k is the Boltzmann constant, 8.62 x 10- 5 evj°K, and T is the
absolute temperature. Equation (7.8) is used to define "temperature"
beyond the range where conventional thermometers melt. The fusion
temperature of 400 x 10 6 °K corresponds to a particle energy of

   -i X 8.6 x 10- 5 x 4 X 10 8 ev = 52kev
Since the ejected particles have energies considerably in excess of 52 kev,
they should be able to kick two more reactant nuclei up to this energy and
thereby sustain the fusion reaction with lots of energy to spare.
    Atoms begin to shed their electrons at temperatures of a few thousand
degrees Kelvin. At one million degrees Kelvin the electrons are practically
all stripped off, and the positively charged nuclei and free-floating elec-
trons form a "plasma." The presence of free electrons makes it easy for
                                                  ATOMS WORK H~RDER        245



  the plasma to conduct electricity, and this fact is very important in the
  control of fusion reactions. A hot plasma will tend to lose energy by
  thermal radiation, and if it loses more than it gains from the fusion
  reactions, the reaction will shut off, !lluch as a match blows out. Each
  fusion reaction has its own "ignition" temperature that must be attained
. if the reaction is to be self-sustaining. The deuterium-tritium reaction
  [Eq. (7.7c)] ignites at around 45 million °K, while the deuterium-
  deuterium reaction requires 400 million °K. Since the problem of making
  a fusion reactor work is largely that of keeping the plasma hot, and this is
  easier to do at 45 million °K than at 400 million °K, it is probable that the
  D-T reaction will be employed in the first successful fusion-reactor
  power plants.
      In order to contain these ultrahot plasmas, the electrical properties of
  the plasma are used. The idea is to apply a magnetic field to the plasma
  that "pinches" the plasma and thereby confines it to the center of the
  magnetic field, away from the vessel walls. Figure 7.14 shows a typical
  sort of toroidal geometry in which the plasma current flows around and
  around the torus (remember the right-hand rule in Chap. 6?). It tells
  us that the force exerted by the magnetic field on the current is toward
  the center of the torus. Thus, the magnetic field tends to pinch the plasma
  into a looplike ring in the middle of the magnet. This pinch compresses
  the plasma and thereby increases its temperature. Magnetic constriction
  of this sort is the primary means for achieving the high plasma temper-
  atures needed to initiate a controlled fusion reaction.
     Unfortunately the system of Fig. 7.14 does not work exactly as ad-
 vertised above. The plasma exhibits instabilities that cause it to wander
 and deform within the torus, eventually striking the cold walls and
  quenching. It appears that these plasma-instability problems can be
 solved by adding stabilizing windings, distorting the torus, or some



~~~~~~\
(~7{( '. /.fJ))
 ~~~~--     --·--·~-~::~)
  '-.,~1>=;~~;~:~~/"/
        ~·-~--,-·1
         ./       Magnetìc field
        ,         caùsìng pinch
                                          FIG. 7.14 IDEA OF MAGNETIC
 Induced' current                         CONTAINMENT. PINCH EFFECT IN A
 in plasma                                TORUS.
246 ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN



combination of the two. The "stellerator" machines in the United States
and the Tokamak machines in Russia are of this type, and the Tokamak
devices were the first to reach temperatures a mere order of magnitude
below those needed to sustain the fusion reaction. At this writing no
fusion reactor has operated with a sustained fusion reaction, but some
experts believe that Tokamak or stellarator devices will do so before
1985. Other experts piace their bets on devices that use high-energy
lasers to heat the plasma to fusion temperatures.
    Once a continuous (or perhaps pulsating) fusion reaction is obtained,
the problem of converting the kinetic energy of the ejected particles to
electrical energy remains. Most of the energy of the deuterium-tritium
reaction is in the kinetic energy of the ejected neutron. A good many of
these neutrons will knife their way through the magnetic-field coils and
escape from the plasma chamber. Once outside they can be moderated
in an appropriate fluid, thereby heating the fl.uid. This hot fl.uid then
can be used to boil steam, and from there on out we have a conventional
power generation system. Liquid metals, especially lithium, are attractive
for this purpose. High convective heat-transfer coeffi.cients (and hence •
high power densities) can be obtained with liquid-metal coolants; they
do not capture neutrons appreciably. A problem is that liquid metals
also carry currents, and the power required to pump them through pipes
in a magnetic field can be more than without the magnetic field. Lithium
has the advantage that tritium, a scarce isotope of hydrogen that is one
of the fusion reactor fuels, can be bred from lithium. So, nonconducting
salts containing lithium atoms (LiF-BeF 2 , or "fl.ibe") are also of some
interest. Research into the thermal and physical properties of these
fl.uids is now under way in parallel with the research and development
of fusion reactors, J.mt the construction of the world's first power-produc-
ing fusion reactor is still many years away.
    An alternative concept for fusion power requires an "open" reactor
into which the fuel is squirted and from which it fl.ows continuously or in
pulses. Magnetic containment and constriction and laser-heating con-
cepts have been explored but are far from the point of providing a sus-
tained thermonuclear reaction. If such a device could be obtained, the
electrical power might be generated by passing the output plasma
through a "magnetohydrodynamic" generator (see Chap. 6). This may
well be the ultimate means for large-scale fusion power generation.
    Elsewhere we have mentioned the fact that fossil-fuel reserves are
dwindling, and that nuclear reserves for fission reactors are finite. But
the energy reserves for fusion power are virtually infinite. If the deuterium-
deuterium reaction can be exploited, the limiting factor will be the
amount of water in the oceans; one hydrogen atom in every 6, 700 is
                                                 ATOMS WORK HARDER         247



deuterium, and so there is practically an inexhaustible supply of deuterium.
One estimate is that the energy available from deuterium in the oceans
is ofthe order of 10 8 times as large as the world's initial fossil-fuel energy
reserves, and of the order of 10 7 times the world's fission energy reserves !
On the other hand, if the deuterium-deuterium reaction cannot be made
to go but the deuterium-tritium reaction can, the fusion energy will be
limited by the tritium supply, most ofwhich would have to be created by
breeding from lithium. Estimates of the lithium reserves suggest that the
tritium supply would limit fusion energy to the order of magnitude of the
initial fossil-fuel reserves. Thus, we might expect lithium to be in short
supply after a hundred years of deuterium-tritium fission power, and the
scientists and engineers of that era will be working hard to develop a
deuterium-deuterium reactor.
   Your ability to deal with nuclear energy technology in a sensible way
will require some basic background in radioactivity as it relates to public
health. We'll take this up in the next section.

RADIATION ANO PUBLIC SAFETY                                                       •
   There are several important quantitative measures of radioactivity.
The "curie" is defined as that amount of any radioisotope that undergoes
3.7 x 10 10 disintegrations per second. The mass that makes up a curie
depends upon the half-life of the radioactive isotope. For long-lived
isotopes such as U 238 , several tons are required to make one curie, while
fora short-lived isotope such as 1131 a curie would be about the size ofa
speck of dust. The amount of radioactive material deposited into the
atmosphere or to be disposed of as reactor waste is usually given in terms
of curies or picocuries ("pico" means 10- 12 ).
   In dealing with the biologica! effects of radiation, the "roentgen,"
"rad," and "rem" are used as measures of radiation exposure. The
roentgen is defined in terms of the amount of x-ray or gamma radiation
necessary to ionize a certain number of atoms in a cubie centimeter of
air at room conductions. The "rad" is defined as the quantity of any
radiation which upon absorption in body tissue is accompanied by the
emission of 100 ergs/gram of tissue. The "rem" is the amount of radiation
that will deposit the same amount of energy into the tissues of an average
man as one roentgen of gamma radiation. Radiation levels in the nuclear
industry are commonly expressed in rem, or in thousandths of a rem
("millirem" or mrem).
   The controversy over nuclear power abounds with various estimates
of the number of curies that will escape into the atmosphere as a result
of some hypothetical reactor accident and estimates of the resulting
248    ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN




exposures in rem. The Atomic Energy Commission has set standards for
permissible radiation; these standards are based on limited data and
educated judgment, and sometimes are attacked as being too low. The
AEC limit for radiation of an individua! in the general public is set at
500 mrem/year to the whole body. The AEC limit for an industria!
worker is ten times greater, 5,000 mrem/year. The AEC limits irradiation
of bone areas to 29,000 mrem/year, and some experts feel that bone
irradiation as high as 291,000 mrem/year is "probably" safe.
    Radiation comes from many places. Cosmic rays bombard the world
continually, providing an average exposure to the general public of about
50 mrem/year per person. Ground radiation from the earth is also signifi-
cant, ranging from 180 to as high as 1,800 mrem/year. Buildings contain
traces of radioactive materials, and a concrete structure can provide
levels up to 100 mrem/year. Food and water expose us each to about
25 mrem/year. All these add up* to an average exposure per person of
about 140 mrem/year from natural causes. In addition, the average
exposure from dental x-rays in the United States is around 55 mrem/year.
    Nuclear power plants are designed to provide no more than 5 m~m/
year to an individuai living just outside the plant. This is a very small
contribution to the total radiation exposure, and does not cause much
widespread concern. lndeed, the output ofradiation from a nuclear power
plant is less than the output from a comparable fossil-fuel power station!
However, a nuclear accident, either by an overheating and meltdown
failure of a reactor core or in transportation of reactor fuels or wastes
or in the storage of radioactive wastes, could significantly increase the
exposure of some and perhaps many individuals, and this is a real cause
for concern. However, the nuclear energy industry and the AEC have
strict procedures for hazards analysis, reactor operation control, waste
disposal, theft protection, etc., and a remarkable record of safety to go
with all these precautions.
    The opposition to nuclear power development has come from both the
technically uneducated and some very knowledgeable scientists. Both
types of people also support the rapid development of nuclear power.
There are risks to be taken in this venture; there are also risks in not
providing an adequate supply of energy to meet the various real needs
of our society. Judgments in debates over the development of nuclear
power invariably revolve around the issues of the values of society, and

* Ifyou wonder why the numbers add up to more than 140 mrem/year, it is because a
person is not steadily exposed to radiation at these rates, and is shielded from radiation a
good part of the time.
                                                     ATOMS WORK HARDER          249



they are frequently clouded by biased technical arguments from one
side or the other. You, as a citizen, may have a hard time sorting the real
from the imagined, the possible from the probable; the more complete
your own understanding of technology and the underlying science, the
better you will do in making the proper interpretations of the facts to
use in deciding how best to make society move in the directions of your
values. This, of course, is what this book is all about.

PROBLEMS

Some practice with numbers
 7.1   Calculate the kinetic energy of a 1,000-gram body moving at 100 cm/sec,
       and express the results in electron volts.
 7.2   Calculate the energy of a proton moving at 50% of the speed of light;
       express in Mev.
 7.3   The isotope ofsodium, Na 24, decays with a half-life of 15 hr. Suppose that
       leak deposits 1 millicurie into the environment. How much radioactive
       materiai will remain 60 hr later?
 7.4   Recali that 1 "rad" deposits 100 erg/gram oftissue. Suppose that each gram
       occupies 1 cubie centimeter. If the energy of the particles is I Mev, how
       many particles must strike the cube of tissue to deposit 500 mrem?
 7.5   Suppose a small nuclear accident releases 1020 atoms of radioactive atoms,
       and that a reactor operator somehow takes these onto his person. Suppose
       they decay by emission of 2-Mev particles with a half-life of 30 min, and
       that ali their energy is absorbed by his tissue. Calculate his radiation
       exposure in rads for this 30-min interval.

To acquaint you with the nuclear power industry
 7.6   Browse through a copy of "Nuclear Energy Conversion," by M. N.
       El-Wakil, Intext Publishers, New York, 1971. Write a short descriptive
       article on some interesting aspect ofnuclear-reactor power that goes beyond
       the materiai presented above.
 7.7   Look through some recent copies of Nuclear News. Write a short review of
       the current areas of concern and interest in the nuclear power field based on
       what you see in this trarle publication.
 7.8   Write to a manufacturer of nuclcar-reactor systems, such as Generai
       Electric, Wcstinghouse, or Gulf Generai Atomic. Ask for descriptive
       materiai on their latest commerciai power reactors. Then, write a dcscrip-
       tion of this system in terms that would be understandable to a layman.
260 ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN


 7.9 Visita nuclear power plant. Draw up a flow diagram of tbe system; find
     out tbe capitai costs, safety history, etc. Write a descriptive article on this
     plant that would be suitable for publication in a magazine devoted to
     informing the public about energy technology.
7.10 Read Fast Breeder Reactors, Scientific American, September 1970, and The
     LMFBR, Mechanical Engineering, February 1973. Then, read a more recent
     article on breeder reactors in a magazine sucb as Nuclear News. Write a
     sbort description of breeder-reactor technology, empbasizing tbe evolution
     that you see taking piace.


Some more comprehensive research problems
7.11   Find out ali you can about the "emergency core cooling" provisions for
       modem reactors. What accidents bave occurred in wbicb tbese systems
       bave been called upon wbere they failed? What radiation exposure resulted?
       What is tbe public impression about these systems? Is tbe public adequately
       informed, or bas it been misled by the industry or its attackers? Write a
       paper on your findings.
7.12 Find out ali you can about the current status offusion power research. How
     much money is spent annually on researcb related to tbe development of
     fusion power? What rate of progress seems to be taking piace? What new
     ideas are exciting those working in this area? Wbat disappointments bave
     these workers bad in the past? How do tbey feel about it? Write a paper on
     your findings.
7.13 Visita university engineering or bospital medicai laboratory wbere radio-
     active materials are used. Find out bow tbey are used, bow tbey are stored,
     and bow theft and spillage are prevented, etc. Write a paper on tbe bealth
     hazards of this operation and the benefits that the operation affords.
7.14 Read the advertisements in Physics Today, Nuclear News, and otber magazines
     serving the nuclear industry. What ancillary industries bave sprung up
     around the nuclear power busine$? What new tecbnologies bave developed
     as a result of research in nuclear energy? Write a paper describing the
     impact of tbe nuclear energy industry on other segments of tbe economy.
7.15 Get to know some nuclear engineers, eitber througb .their companies or
     througb professional meetings sucb as locai meetings of cbapters of tbe
     American Nuclear Society. Find out wbat sorts of things interest tbem.
     How do they feel ahout working on weapons? How do they feel about the
     safety ofnuclear power reactors? How do tbey feel about the management
     of tbe AEC? How do they compare with other people wbom you know?
     Write a paper relating your interpretation of tbeir value systems and the
     way tbat they bave adjusted in their own particular field.
  ITHAPPENS
ONLY ON EARTH
           In which we see
       the power of the world's
          greatest engineer




                 )
ENERGETICS OF THE ATMOSPHERE
The earth is a very unique piace. It is a planet of a particular size which
gives it a particular gravitational strength. It is made up of particular
elements, which gives it a particular chemistry and a particular atmo-
sphere. And it is located at a particular distance from a star with a partic-
ular rate of radiant energy release, which serves to drive its atmosphere
in a particular way. This in turn makes particular chemical evolutions
more likely than others, and makes for particular climates, and ali this
has led to the particular forms of life that presently inhabit the earth.
In this chapter we shall acquaint you with the energy flows that regulate
the earth's atmosphere, oceans, and life systems. In Chap. l we looked

                                                                         251
252   ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN




briefly at the overall energetics ofthe earth. We learned that there is very
nearly an exact balance between the income of energy from the sun and
the output of energy by radiation to deep space. This delicate balance
determines the average temperature of the earth, and small changes in
either the input or output would result in changes in the earth's temper-
ature. Man is doing things that can produce these changes, and to under-
stand why, how, and how much, we need to know more about the details
of the energy flows within the atmosphere. So, we will begin with a more
comprehensive look at what happens to the incoming radiation.
    Radiation is produced when atoms in excited states decay to lower-
energy states by emission ofphotons. Ifthe photon carries a lot ofenergy,
it will appear as high-frequency (or short-wavelength) radiation. So, in
a very hot body such as a star the atoms are in very energetic, excited
states, and thus they emit radiation at very short wavelengths. In contrast,
a colder body, such as the earth, will emit radiation at longer wave-
lengths. The property of the radiation that describes quantitatively the
relative amounts of radiation at different wavelengths is called the
"spectrum"; the "spectral density" is defìned as the amount of radiant •
energy in a narrow band of wavelengths, expressed on a per-wavelength
basis. Figure 8.1 shows the spectral-density distribution with wavelength
 (the "spectrum") for solar radiation at the point where this energy is
incident upon the earth's disk. The solar spectrum is sharply peaked at
just below 1 micron. About half the solar energy is in the visible range
 (0.4 to 0.7 micron). The rest ofthe solar energy can be felt but not seen,
and most of this unseen energy is in the "infrared" range over O. 7
micron. The solar spectrum corresponds to radiation from a body at a
temperature of around 6000°K. In contrast, the earth, which has an
average radiation temperature of around 285°K, radiates energy at much
longer wavelengths. The earth's radiation is almost entirely invisible,
with practically all the energy lying in the infrared range. A spectrum
for radiation of the same power from a body at 300°K is also shown in
Fig. 8.1. There is, of course, a tiny amount of radiant energy in the
visible range; otherwise things could not be seen !
    The rate of energy incidence on the top of the atmosphere per square
meter of surface area varies markedly with latitude, season, and time of
day. The radiative power per unit of area (the radiative "flux") from the
sun is the same at all points on a piane perpendicular to the radiation
 (piane AA in Fig. 8.2). Along the path ofthe sun's declination this energy
also passes through the same area on the surface (area B of Fig. 8.2).
However, near the poles this energy is spread out over a large area (C in
Fig. 8.2), and hence the power per unit of surface area is lower near the
                5 {~;---.,,.,....· ••• I


 "-·
 oL
                2    ~                                            ~--,,\



 V                   ~                                   Ext raterrestria l
                                                         solar radia hon
 E                                                       2. ly/min
 e
   I
             0.5 j
                     !
 E                   I
                                                                           Black body
             0.2 1-                                                        radiati on
                     1                                                     at 300 °K
             0.1     'r                                                    0.67 ly/m":n
                 '
            0.05 ~
                                                                               /
                                                                              v-·
                     !
                l
           0.02 !-

           0.01      L
                     j


                 t
 E
_,._...
          0.005 i~-1lv_, 00 1 ca[11crnz
 u
 01                  I'
 (.L
ti)
          CJ.QQ2 ;...
                 I



          Q.001      L."~..L ...• "' ••_..L,,-...-L....- ...1...""-·
                    0.1      0.2        0.5        1         2         ".
                                                                       J            10        50   100
                                                WavelE::ngth, microns
                                             (1 micron = -io- 6 meters)
FIG. 8.1           SPECTRA OF SOLAR ANO TERRESTRIAL RADIATION.




                                   A




                                                                           FIG. 8.2      GEOMETRICAL SPREADING.

                                                                                                           253
254 ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN



poles. The length of time each day that the area near the poles is exposed
to the sun is quite different from that at the equator. In fact, within the
arctic circle the sun never sets in the summer. So, the net result is that
each day in June more energy is incident on a square mile of earth at the
North Pole than at the equator ! Indeed, the world's highest amount of
incident energy per day occurs at the South Pole on Dee. 22 ! Figure 8.3
shows the daily energy-flux input to the top of the atmosphere as a func-
tion oflatitude and season. These values are in "langleys," a unit of energy
flux popular with atmospheric scientists; 1 langley = 1 cal/cm 2 • The
solar energy flux (perpendicular to plane AA in Fig. 7.2) is about 2,880
langleys/day, which is more than twice the maximum energy flux ob-
served at a fixed point on earth on any given day.

    900 r--·-:.11z~7771rrr\<;··1Hr-1 \,Y·,~;<~t:::~------------·--ri
  N      i            ,.//i//// 1/ \ \ !\\<:!~/I\\\\'\{_··"'·..                                                             ; i
         G-· ()//i/////.
    60°~ \~ ,<l//jj
                                                     I)\ :'. (\ I\ \ \\\\k<<:·--.·'·too.o..lJi
                                                                                 \\._...\.L'-.'· . . . .                    ì
         (,,..'l..\)\) / /     Y// I i                    -"-<oo., f i
                                                               :             \ \ \ \'t-·
         i7.-- ~()~ • li / ; 1 / ~!~        \ \ \ \ ' ··. . '..i'oo~ 'T-1
         L,./~()···      '1 / - / i Eq:; 0g \ \ '.1 . 'i!'"Oo "j-j
         t   /   ~<:) .· '      I \ E. ID    I  \  \  • • S;       • ·--t !
       i/ ,,.f:> /      i ·                             \ ~~ I                     '-                i"·-.. ., Oo__         ,--1
   30° i-;:.."'' ro()f::i
         v-     _,,. ,.
                        I'
                        1·  / ,
                                                            \À'Of'                      -.\      \J
                                                                                                   r
                                                                                                         ·, ~o ·--,_.J..
                                                                                                           ~ ' "-....    ,
                                                                                                                                J
         i .,,-" 1~ i< ·~ .                        .,,_\'?.~       --- '         '· >< i '•. ,..Oo - --L
         1"'"     .
         i ___,,,,-- _,-0
                            0 l
                            e:/ '-'</~/                        I
                                                               .              ~~    0
                                                                                ? e I        ooo '-...-------L..'
                                                                                            'D

         t          ,'a" ·3           e/'/                  . ..L.                 "-         -3~                 ·,~       j ,




         ,n/
         i __,.-·
                      ~~
                          ~ 6-l1 <\)/ ~(\\) -
                            a> 1 /
                                                               i      -•                  ..... o-'·
                                                                                              (!)..,,!
                                                                                                         .9aV           .. -,-~:
       0 ;---·                          _..,_,.,               ;                · ·••

      o P""- ;~~/-~()()/~"''< ' .. _···-'ro·:~;:·----~
         !---         /     ~ )"
                            ~I_,/ 1c§Y
                            L ' I
                            (1) l /
                                        .•              .

                                                          'T
                                             <01\Si::i·· .---
                                                               ,
                                                               i
                                                                                    '-.
                                                                           -- ..... ,
                                                                            . .'· "- ':J..
                                                                                   411 '
                                                                                              S: ,I
                                                                                          '···~Ì\
                                                                                       -I-! \
                                                                                                           "-..
                                                                                                                  '(1-;  -- -
                                                                                                                                :



   30°                    />_/ / ·' ~<) ,                      .      ---,.   ..._',.._.'lo(\                     I      .!.I ~

                   ,I I/. ,· ~\) ----r-., ·,·,,, \ \ \
                          !/ .·' ')                       '•. ·-._, '· I ' \ \    -t;;I ;
       ;. .                                                                       ol :
       1
       i-......
                §1111    ).! ,/ ../,.,_~~
                                      /Jr:)()-·
                                                ---+ ·-' '\,, \ ·,. ~\~ \\ ~o Uli  t..
       ' (           ~!.
                       i      .
                                / ,.- -~ _,... -;--.. , ',,, ., \ \J \ '·\ \1 --\ 21
                                    /      ~·      '   '-._   '"'-'\\L\            C:f
   6Qo          /f-'/l;?/,,\;ì I '--...,,,,\\1\\1\ì~I
               ' I ' I ~/I" ()~,,                              ' '      \[\\V \ \l I
  s             (I /~ry/ /                                     : ""'-::~;~~\\\ \ 1~ 1
                \ I          I /                   !                ;,'l\\\~\ I 11~ ! '
   90° ::                         ~ ... --- L - "·-.LL__ .l.. ______l__j_).\\\1~.J. .iJL.J...,
                JFM                   AMJ   J                                      ASO                            ND
                                        Month
FIG. 8.3 DAILY SOLAR-RADIATION INPUT AT THE TOP OF THE ATMOSPHERE.
IN LANGLEYS.
                                         IT HAPPENS ONLY ON EARTH       255



    What happens to the solar radiation incident upon the atmosphere?
 Some of the solar energy is reflected and scattered by the atmosphere and
clouds back into space. Some penetrates directly through to the surface
as direct-beam solar radiation, and sqme is scattered by the atmosphere
and ultimately reaches the surface as diffuse sky radiation. This scattering
is selective in the blue range in a normal cloudless smog-free atmosphere,
which is why the sky looks blue (you can guess why it looks brown on a
smoggy day).
    Absorption plays several key roles in the atmosphere. The various
molecules in the atmosphere absorb radiation in their own way; this
jumps them to excited states. High in the atmosphere 0 2 (oxygen) and
0 3 (ozone) molecules absorb some of the incoming radiation, mostly in
the ultraviolet portiorr of the spectrum. This effectively blocks out all
radiation at wavelengths shorter than 0.3 micron, and provides the main
source of energy to drive the air motions in the upper atmosphere. In
addition, it shields biologica! systems on the surface from damaging
"ultraviolet" {short-wave) radiation. Most of the atmosphere absorption
is due to dust, water, and carbon dioxide in the air, and occurs through-
out the lower levels of the atmosphere. At wavelengths about O. 7 micron
the solar beam is strongly depleted through absorption by water and
carbon dioxide. This varies from place to place, depending on the local
climate. The clear atmosphere absorbs better than do clouds, which in
part explains why it can be warm on cloudy days.
    Figure 8.4 shows the average distribution (by percentage) of the
incident solar energy. Note that only about half the incident energy
reaches the earth's surface.
    This is only part ofthe radiation picture in the atmosphere. The earth's
surface and atmosphere are warm, and hence both radiate energy.
Because of the low temperature this energy is long-wavelength, a~ dis-
cussed previously. Some of this energy passes directly to space; the rest
is absarbed by the atmosphere, or scattered within the atmosphere and
eventually absorbed by the atmosphere or returned to the surface. The
atmosphere itself radiates energy at various rates from various regions.
Some of the atmospheric radiation escapes to space, some is reabsorbed
elsewhere in the atmosphere, and some is returned to earth. These
radiative interactions between the land and ocean surfaces and the
atmosphere are very complex, and a proper accounting requires tracing
all the bounces that take place. Figure 8.5 shows the average distribution
of terrestrial and atmospheric radiation, expressed in percent of the energy
incident on the top of the atmosphere.
    Ifyou examine the numbers in Figs. 8.4 and 8.5, you will see that the
atmosphere exports considerably more radiant energy than it receives.
                                               ,/




                                                         f
                                                     ·!CO/~
                                                         '
                                                         l
                                                                                            Up scatter
                                                                                                 //
                                                                                             /

                                                9%' '                                       9%
                                                                                       //
                             Atmospheric ;:/        ,o
                                                                                   (
                             absorption                  i
                                                                                   ì
                                                         '
                                                         t
                   ;l·j
                   ::pi~
~"""..... ,J.,   ,,,..;...,~.o-"<'.•o•--,•,,




       Diffuse
        from
       clouds
FIG. 8.4   DISTRIBUTION OF THE INCOMING SOLAR RADIATION,




                 Atrnospheric
                  absorption
                   .:?




                                    ·~·
                              105%


                                                              .~· ~· .·.
                                                              ,'.'

                                                              ..
                                                              -
                                                                   ....
                                                                    ~
                                                                        -


                                                                        ~-
                                                                             ,'

                                                                             !."




FIG. 8.5 DISTRIBUTION OF TERRESTRIAL ANO ATMOSPHERIC LONG-WAVE
RADIATION. EXPRESSED IN PERCENTAGES OF THE INCIDENT SOLAR ENERGY.

256
                                        IT HAPPENS ONL)' ON EARTH     257



There most be other mechanisms of energy transport between the surface
of the earth and the atmosphere to supply the extra energy. Convective
heat transfer is one of these mechanisms; but the primary mechanism
is the transfer of energy between surf!'lce and atmosphere associated with
the removal of water vapor from the surface and the return of water,
liquid (rain) and solid (snow).
    For the earth as a whole the radiation incident at the top of the
atmosphere exactly balances the radiation from the atmosphere. But this
is not true locally or seasonally. Toward the poles from 40° latitudes the
radiation from the atmosphere is larger than the solar radiation. So,
some energy must move from more equatorial latitudes to these polar
regions to supply the energy to the atmosphere in these regions. In the
region between the 40° latitudes the radiation output is smaller than the
solar input, and so some energy must be carried away from these regions,
or else stable temperatures would not be obtained. The strong convective
circulations in the atmosphere (and oceans) are responsible for these
energy transfers; if convective transport of energy did not take place in
the atmosphere, the surface would be warming up at the rate of 250°C
per day in some places and the atmosphere would be cooling by as much
as 1°C per day in others!
    The mechanisms by which convective circulations take place in the
atmosphere are reasonably well understood. In fact, mechanicians are
now able to describe atmospheric motions with mathematical equations,
and solve these on large computers. Such calculations today form a
primary basis for long-range weather forecasting ! The actual flows are
very complex; we'll use Fig. 8.6 to help explain what happens. Air near
the surface on the summer side of the equator is warmed and tends to
rise because it is lighter than the surrounding air mass. This air will




FIG. 8.6 LARGE-SCALE CIRCULATIONS IN THE ATMOSPHERE ARE RESPONSIBLE
FOR MAINTAINING LOCAL ENERGY BALANCES.
258   ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN




expand as it rises and eventually fan out to flow toward the poles along
the top of the atmosphere. As it cools by radiation to space, it will tend
to sink and eventually returns to the surface, and then flow back toward
the equator. This cellular circulation pattern is strongest in the winter
hemisphere; usually several secondary circulation patterns are formed,
depending upon the season. This sort of model was postulated by George
Hadley, an English meteorologist, in 1735, and the cellular circulations
bear the name "Hadley cells." The general picture has been confirmed
by many experiments and theoretical calculations.
    Superimposed on this general north-south circulation is a complex
pattern of waves called "Rossby" waves. These waves progress from
west to east and are responsible for the prevailing motion of the atmo-
sphere in this direction. Waves with length scales of a few thousand kilo-
meters progress around the globe in times of the order of one week.
Typically there are about seven waves wrapped around the globe.
Since they generally develop as a result of strong horizontal temperature
variations, they are most pronounced in winter months. The cyclones
and anticyclones that appear in weather ·patterns are manifestations of
these waves, and are very effective in providing the horizontal convec-
tive transports of energy that are needed to offset the local radiation
imbalance.
    How does the energy convected about by atmospheric circulation
get off the surface, and how is it deposited in the atmosphere? Water
plays a very key role in this process. Solar heating of oceans and lakes
causes water to evaporate; water vapor (steam) is then carried about by
atmospheric currents. An engineer would think in terms of the enthalpy
(flow energy) associated with this stream; meteorologists think instead
of the "latent heat" of the water vapor, which is simply the enthalpy
change associated with evaporation. In addition, the air is warm at the
equator, and warm air has more energy than cold air. Meteorologists
cali the enthalpy associated with the warm air the "sensible heat" of the
atmosphere; you will see various terms like these in your reading of
atmospheric energetics, depending on the background of the particular
writer. In any event, water vapor is carried from the equatorial regions
to the more polar latitudes, where it rains or snows. The condensation
or freezing of the water takes energy out of the water; where does this
energy go? We hope that you guessed correctly that it is put into the air,
and that this supplies a major portion of the energy radiated by the
atmosphere in the polar latitudes.
    Man's use of energy unquestionably affects the atmospheric circulation,
weather, and climate, and the only real question is how much and in what
direction? There is a great deal of debate on this question, and the com-
                                           IT HAPPENS ONLY ON EARTH        259



plexity of the processes involved means that simple answers can't be
obtained. For example, there is a big question about the effect of carbon
dioxide in the upper atmosphere; the amount of C0 2 in the atmosphere
has risen at the rate of about 0.2% per year since the early 1940s. Now,
C0 2 is an excellent absorber of long-wave radiation, of the type emitted
from the earth's surface. Since the C0 2 content is increasing, there should
be more atmospheric absorption, and hence the "greenhouse" effect
should tend to make the earth get warmer. But, the average temperature
of the atmosphere seems to have fallen slightly in this period. Does the
extra C0 2 help or hurt? It is not really clear at this point. This is a
question of great interest to atmospheric scientists, and of great concern
to the public who live and try to survive under the C0 2 roof above.
   Local climatological changes are more likely to be of immediate con-
cern. But no one has investigated what would happen to the weather in
Arizona if large portions of that state were to be used for collection of
solar energy for export to Los Angeles and New York. Without the
reradiation characteristic of a hot desert area, might not the atmospheric
circulation patterns change to bring energy into the region to supply the
energy for radiation from the atmosphere? This would mean more rain
in that area, which could be very beneficiai but could also reduce the
suitability of the area for solar energy collection ! Whether this is a fearful
fantasy or a real potential problem is not at all certain; but this is the sort
of question that a responsible citizen should ask and insist on good
answers for before any large-scale effort at solar energy collection is
attempted.


ENERGETICS OF THE BIOSPHERE

    A tiny fraction of the solar energy that reaches the surface of the e<!-rth
is absorbed by plants. Through an elaborate and very complex food chain
that mother nature devised through a very long research and develop-
ment activity, this energy maintains all living things. No study of energy
can be complete without some discussion ofp.ature's supreme technology.
    The principal process in the energetics of life support on earth is
"photosynthesis," the process by which plants convert radiant energy to
an easily usable chemical form. Photosynthesis is nature's version of
"direct energy conversion," in which radiant energy is converted to a
convenient form without an intermediate "heat engine." Nature's "heat
engine," the atmosphere, of course plays an important role in life support,
bringing rain to thirsty plants, giving mobility to drifting seeds, and
providing clouds to shield life from the searing sun.
    Let's begin by recalling the basics of chemical reactions as discussed in
260   ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN




Chap. 5. Molecules are formed from atoms, and are held together by
chemical bonds. These bonds take the form of electrons in the outer shells
of the atoms that are "shared" by the atoms in the molecule. Now, any
process that upsets these shared electrons can assist in the breakup of the
molecule; any process that places electrons in a better position of being
shared can assist in the formulation of new molecules. And this is precisely
what is involved in photosynthesis.
    Photosynthesis is a complicated stepwise process. It begins when light
energy is absorbed by chlorophyll molecules in plants. One can think
of light as a stream of tiny particles, "photons," that carry kinetic energy
and momentum, but not mass. Photons strike chlorophyll molecules and
interact with the outer-shell electrons, and this helps the chlorophyll
molecules decompose and react with other molecules in the plant to form
a variety of other molecules, of which carbohydrates and adenosine
triphosphate (ATP for short) are the most important. The net result
is an increase in the energy stored within the plant; some of the light
energy has been converted to chemical bonding energy, and it is this
energy that the plant uses for its life and that animals that eat the plant •
obtain for their survival.
    Plants do not absorb all the incident radiation, and they do not
convert all that they absorb to chemical bond energy. Only relatively
high-energy photons are able to disturb the chlorophyll molecules suffi-
ciently to initiate photosynthesis; light in the violet end of the visibl~
part of the radiation spectrum and~isible radiation in thi( ~
range are most effective in promoting photosynthesis. Something of the
order of 5% of the solar radiation incident on an average planted area is
converted to chemical energy by the plants. However, there is wide
variation between plants of different types; some plants evidently are
able to convert as much as 15% ofthe incident radiant energy to chemical
bond energy through the photosynthesis process.
    The chemical composition of the atmosphere plays a crucial role in the
energetics ofplant life. Carbon dioxide and water vapor in the atmosphere
absorb radiation in the infrared range, and ozone absorbs much of the
ultraviolet radiation. Thus, the atmosphere provides a "window" for
radiation in the intermediate visible range. It is not surprising that mother
nature designed eyes for her creatures that are sensitive in this inter-
mediate range; given a different composition in the atmosphere, different
wavelengths of radiation would get through, and thus different eyes
would be required and different energetic processes would have to evolve.
The blocking of ultraviolet radiation by the atmosphere protects living
systems from excessive doses of high-energy radiation, which can produce
                                             IT HAPPENS ONLY ON EARTH       261



    deathly breaking of molecular bonds. The radiation emitted from the
    earth's surface is almost totally in the infrared region; ifit were not for the
    opacity of the atmosphere to infrared radiation, this energy ~ould all
    be lost to space, nights would be very., very cold, and plants would freeze
    and die. So, life depends upon both the opacity and the transparency
    of the atmosphere; if the wastes of human activity that are disc;harged
    into the atmosphere change its character significantly, life will be unable
    to exist in its present form. Since man is apt to produce changes much \
    faster than mother nature can alter her technology, it is entirely possible
    that man's failure to use his technology to maintain the character of his
    atinosphere could lead to the death of all life on earth.
       Animals and plants work together to maintain a very delicate chemical
    balance in the atmosphere. The process of photosynthesis is very com-
    plicated, and involves a number of substeps; but the overall chemical
    reaction can be represented by


                                                                                      •
    The molecule C 6 H 12 0 6 is "glucose," a sugar and a derivative of carbo-
    hydrates (CH 2 0) . The food chain in animals is initiated by those that
    feed upon plants, extracting the bonding energy provided by the glucose
    and other carbohydrates. Another series of very complicated chemical
    reactions support animai life, which returns carbon dioxide to the
    atmosphere through processes of respiration, which can be represented
    by



    Thus, animals supply the 00 2 needed by plants for photosynthesis, and
    plants supply the oxygen needed by animals for respiration. The sun
    provides energy for plants, the plants provide the energy source for
    herbivores, and herbivores provide the energy source for carnivores,
    which in turn provide the energy source for other carnivores, including
    man. Dead plants and animals provide the food for decomposing organ-
    isms, which thereby return the chemical ingredients of life to the soil
    to be used by plants another day. For all life the ultimate source of energy
    is the solar energy passed down to earth through the atmo11phere's
    delicately balanced radiation window.
        The details of the mechanisms by which individuai cells in plants and
    animals engage in these energy-exchange processes have been the subject
    of intense research in recent times, and these processes are now rather well
\   understood. The energy-exchange mechanisms of living cells are of two
      262   ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN




      types. "Autotrophic" (self-reliant) cells get their energy directly from
      sunlight. "Heterotropic" cells require a supply of ready-made fuel of
      considerable chemical complexity, such as protein and carbohydrate,
      which themselves are derived from other cells. Heterotrophic cells obtain
      energy by oxidizing these fuels with oxygen drawn from the atmosphere
      by respiration, converting some of this energy to forms useful for the
      biologica! creation in which they reside.
         Chlorophyll molecules are connected spatially with other molecules
      within autotrophic cells in such a way that electrons jarred free from the
      chlorophyll molecules by photons are carried away and passed around
      by other molecules through a circular chain of chemical reactions. The
      electrons lose their energy bit by bit in these reactions, forming ATP
      molecules in the process. The A TP molecules store energy in the form of
      high-energy chemical bonds between oxygen and phosphor~'J2hos­
      phafechemical bonds"). The A TP is used in a second series of reactions
,\I   where carbon dioxide and water are consumed, glucose is formed, and
      oxygen is released. Thus, the autotrophic cells can be thought of as
      miniaturized little chemical plants that convert sunlight directly into •
      chemical-bond energy of glucose. Under special laboratory conditions it
      appears that the efficiency of this conversion process can be as high
     ~ 75%!
          Heterotrophic cells are tiny energy-conversion systems of a different
      type. Glucose acquired by the cell and ATP within the cell are reacted
      chemically through a long series of reactions to create lactic acid and to
      double the amount of ATP available. This process, called "glycolysis,"
      in essence converts chemical-bonding energy of glucose into the more
      easily tapped chemical-bond energy of ATP. A second complex series of
      chemical reactions, the "citric acid cycle," finally oxidizes the products of
      glycolysis into carbon dioxide and water, and produces additional ATP
      molecules. Thus, the overall process is one of conversion of the bonding
      energy of chemical energy input in the form of glucose to chemical energy
      in the form of ATP. The efficiency of this little chemical-energy-conversion
      system is of the order of 50% ! The complex miniature structure of these
      two types of ei{ergy-conversion systems is truly remarkable, and their high
      efficiency must make the twentieth century engineer very humble.
      Advances in electronic technology have produced superminiaturized
      components, but these are giants in comparison with the remarkable
·     miniaturization of the complex energy-transforming systems that have

(l    been developed by mother nature within every living cell; nature is truly
      the world's most accomplished engineer!
j,       Some very exciting research into the processes ofphotosynthesis, aimed
      at replicating it in a man-made device, is now well along. Perhaps within
      262   ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN




      types. "Autotrophic" (self-reliant) cells get their energy directly from
      sunlight. "Heterotropic" cells require a supply of ready-made fuel of
      considerable chemical complexity, such as proteiq and carbohydrate,
      whjch themselves are derived from other cells. Heterotrophic cells obtain
      energy by oxidizing these fuels with oxygen drawn from the atmosphere
      by respiration, converting some of this energy to forms useful for the
      biologica! creation in which they reside.
         Chlorophyll molecules are connected spatially with other molecules
      within autotrophic cells in such a way that electrons jarred free from the
      chlorophyll molecules by photons are carried away and passed around
      by other molecules through a circular chain of chemical reactions. The
      electrons lo:re their energy bit by bit in these reactions, forming ATP
      molecules in the process. The A TP molecules store energy in the form of
      high-energy chemical bonds between oxygen and phosphor~'!ilios­
      pliatechemical bonds"). The ATP is used in a second series of reactions
'\I   where carbon dioxide and water are consumed, glucose is formed, and
      oxygen is released. Thus, the autotrophic cells can be thought of as
      miniaturized little chemical plants that convert sunlight directly into •
      chemical-bond energy of glucose. Under special laboratory conditions it
      appears that the efficiency of this conversion process can be as high
      ~75%!
       Heterotrophic cells are tiny energy-conversion systems of a different
   type. Glucose acquired by the cell and ATP within the cell are reacted
   chemically through a long series of reactions to create lactic acid and to
   double the amount of ATP available. This process, called "glycolysis,"
   in essence converts chemical-bonding energy of glucose into the more
   easily tapped chemical-bond energy of ATP. A second complex series of
   chemical reactions, the "citric acid cycle," finally oxidizes the products of
   glycolysis into carbon dioxide and water, and produces additional ATP
   molecules. Thus, the overall process is one of conversion of the bonding
   energy of chemical energy input in the form of glucose to chemical energy
   in the form of ATP. The efficiency ofthis little chemical-energy-conversion
   system is of the order of 50% ! The complex miniature structure of these
   two types of en"ergy-conversion systems is truly remarkable, and their high
   efficiency must make the twentieth century engineer very humble.
   Advances in electronic technology have produced superminiaturized
   components, but these are giants in comparison with the remarkable
   miniaturization of the complex energy-transforming systems that have

 i
( been developed by mother nature within every living cell; nature is truly
   the world's most accomplished engineer !
j . Some very exciting research into the processes ofphotosynthesis, aimed
   at replicating it in a man-made device, is now well along. Perhaps within
                                         IT HAPPENS ONLY ON liARTH      263



the decade a new energy conversion technology, based on nature's
amazing des[gns, will dev.elop to the point where very high efficiency
solar energy conversion is possible and practical; this could revolutionize
our thinking about our choices for energy systems !


FROM NATURE TO MAN

    Man survives by eating a combination ofplants and animals. We have
 discussed some ofthe processes by which solar energy is converted to useful
 chemical energy in plant and animai cells; but what about the efficiency
 of all this from the point of view of man? Popular agricultural crops
 convert of the order of I% of the incident radiant energy to chemical
 energy; something of the order of 10% of the chemical energy eaten by a
person is used by the body, the rest being discharged in chemical wastes
 and heat. So, a vegetarian diet represents something of the order of a
 tenth of a percenr effic1ency of utihzation of solar ener . In societies
 t at re y on w1 animals or meat, e creatures that come to their end
on the dinner table might have fed on other creatures, which have fed on           •
other creatures, and so forth up the food chain to creatures that fed on
plants. A food chain that contains a dozen creatures would have an
efficiency of the order of 0.1 12, or 0.0000000001%! With such a low
                                                                               t
efficiency a very large area is needed to collect enough solar energy to
sustain each person, and starvation will limit the population of any such
area. On the other hand, by growing beef, man has greatly shortened the
food chain, to the point where his efficiency of extraction of solar energy
is of the order of 0.01 %· Thus, in spite of the remarkable efficiency that


                                                                               I
nature has given us at the cellular level, we still do not do a very com-
petent job in our overall use of the sun's energy.
    An average person consumes of the order of 70 watts just to maintain-
minimum body functions. Activity increases the energy-expenditure rate
to as much as 400 watts, i.e., the power lised by four typical desk study
lamps. The average normai adult in a modern society needs an input of
about 3,000 kcal/day to function properly. We can combine this in-
formation with the efficiency estimates to calculate the maximum
population densities that can be sustained with current agricultural
technology. Let's take an area where the average incident solar radiation
is about 300 langleys/day (do you remember that l langley is I cal/cm 2?).
At I 00% efficiency of solar energy conversion, it would take I 0 4 cm =
I m 2, or about a square yard, to collect enough solar energy to maintain
one person. However, in a hunting society with an overall efficiency of
0.1 12 , it will take 1012 square meters, or about half a million square
miles, to produce enough food to support a single person! In contrast,
     264   ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN




   a society based on beefproduction will have an efficiency of about 0.01 %,
   and each square mile ofpasture will be able to support about 250 persons;
   in other words, each person would require about 1 acre of land for beef
   production. There are some 5 billion acres of grazing land in use today,
   and it has been estimated that 8. b~lli~n acres ar~ available. This su~g~sts
(I that the world should try to hrmt 1ts populat10n to around 8 bilhon
 \ people, slightly more than twice the present population. The alternatives
   are to develop more efficient food chains, or to survive on less, but even
   with some reasonable adjustments it is not likely that the earth can
   support more than a dozen billion people. Without population contro!,
   the world will suffer famines that have their fundamental roots in the
   inability of the combined technologies of man and nature to convert a
   sufficient fraction of the incident solar energy to forms suitable for the
   sustenance of life. Mother nature, the grand engineer, may someday
   develop new technologies to deal with these conversions more efficiently,
   but her development times are measured in eons rather than year§...)t
   will fall upon man's technologies to imp:Ove the efficiency of energy
   utilization for food production, and to limit population growth, in order•
   to develop a satisfactory steady-state existence for life on earth.
       Man's technology is presently depleting the energy reserves of the
   earth. Fusion offers the only long-term hope as a reserve energy source;
   but the use of any reserve energy leads ultimately to the deposition of
   waste heat into the atmosphere, and this has already led to locai weather
   complications. Man should perhaps take a due from mother nature. She
   did not develop creatures that use the energy reserves of the earth;
   instead she developed complex systems for direct and indirect use of the
   income energy from the sun. Solar energy has been neglected by man
   as too difficult to use, too costly, too impractical. As long as reserves are
   available, and as long as the use of these energy reserves does not signifi-
   cantly alter our atmosphere or biosphere, these are rational arguments.
   But what should man do when these arguments no longer have strength?
      Man can capture solar energy with his own technology, using mirrors
   to collect the energy, pipes and pumps to circuiate fluids through the focal
   points of the mirrors to extract the solar energy as heat, and sophisticated
   vapor power cycles to produce electrical energy. Estimates reveal that
   large areas of reflectors will be required; who is going to keep these
   mirrors clean? An alternative that deserves considerable study involves
   man's use of nature's technology to use solar energy. There are efficient
   chemical processes for producing alcohol and methane from glucose,
   and both alcohol and methane are easily stored and transported. Let's
   see how much alcohol and methane we would have to grow to supply
   our energy needs using agriculture. The world energy use in 1970 was
   of the order of 2 x 1019 calories. The solar energy incident on the
                                              IT HAPPENS ONLY ON EARTH          265



approximately 4 billion acres of land presently under cultivation was of
the order of 5 x 1022 calories. If of the order of 4% of this land were
put into agricultural production of crops that yield alcohol and methane
at about 1% efficiency, all the energy used by all the world in 1970
could be provided. And there would be no mirrors to wash! In the United
States we pay farmers not to produce crops for food; we could instead
pay them to produce crops for energy!
   The agricultural production of solar energy is a concept that should
receive considerable study and attention in the years ahead. It represents
a way to combine man's best technologies with the best technologies of
nature, and may be the only long-term way to safely, reliably, and cheaply
bring the full benefits of abundant and useful energy from nature to man.


PROBLEMS

You are now on your own
 8.1   Read The Energy Cycle ofthe Earth, and Human Energy Production as a
       Process in the Biosphere, both in Scientific American, September 1970, and
       Thermal Pollution and Aquatic Life, Scientific American, March 1969.
       Then, write a short article for your local newspaper outlining the major
       problems that man's use of energy has caused or may cause.
 8.2   Read The Flow of Energy in a Hunting Society, .The Flow of Energy in an
       Agricultural Society, and The Flow ofEnergy in an Industriai Society, all in
       Scientific American, September 1971. Then, write a short article for Reader's
       Digest that summarizes the differences in the energy flows in these societies
       and discusses the implications for the future development of the world.
 8.3   Read How Animals Run, Scientific American, May 1960, The Energetics of
       Bird Flight, Scientific American, May 1969, The Flow of Energy in -the
       Biosphere, Scientific American, September 1971, and How Cells Transform
       Energy, Scientific Amertcan, September 1961. Then, write a short article on
       Nature's grand technology.
 8.4   Survey Scientific American issues published since January 1972. Review the
       articles that deal with nature's energy technology, and those that deal with
       man's energy technology. Discuss and compare the systems that you have
       learned about through this review.
 8.5   Prepare a short talk on energy as it relates to man's problems suitable for
       presentation to an eighth grade class. Decide for yourself what materiai is
       important to cover, what reading you can recommend to the students, and
       what reading you can suggest to their teacher to help increase his or her
       effectiveness in dealing with energy as a class study subject. Your locai
       school district will probably be delighted to accept your offer of a lecture
       on this subject.
266    ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN



 8.6   Find a newspaper article discussing a particular energy problem of interest.
       Does the article appear to make sense scientifically and technically? What
       aspects of the problem that were neglected by the article do you feel are
       important? Write a short letter to the editor detailing your contribution.

 8.7   Survey your magazines for advertisements that relate to energy. Critique
       each in terms of its scientific accuracy, technical sensibility, operative
       system, and probable impact upon its readers. Write a short paper sum-
       marizing your findings, and send copies to the publishers of each magazine.

 8.8   Read your electricity and gas meters, and live a normai week. Read them
       again, and live a week in which you take special care to conserve energy.
       Read the meters at the end of the week, and compare your energy ex-
       penditures for the two weeks. Then, set a goal of an additional 50% saving
       of energy, and plot your daily expenditures of energy to see how you are
       doing during the third week. Force yourself to meet your energy-conserva-
       tion goal. Write a short article on your experiences for submission to your
       locai newspaper, and send copies to your locai utility companies.

 8.9   Eat normally for one week, keeping an accurate calorie count. Then,
       maintain a diet of only 2,000 kcal/day for a few days (give it up when yol!
       begin to get adverse health effects, and don't start without your doctor's
       approvai!). Write a short article indicating how this low-level diet affected
       your performance; include comparisons with diets available to persons in
       less fortunate circumstances.

8.10 Read "The Limits ofGrowth," Universe Books, 1972. What does this book
     say about the outlook for mankind? What role does energy play in the
     analysis? Read some published reviews of the book, and then draw your
     own conclusions about the predictions made by the authors. Think about
     the role of technology in solving these problems, and what you would do if
     asked to vote upon national policies of the type recommended by the
     authors for the development of a more stable world.
    AppenJix



 UNIT SYSTEMS
ANO CONVERSION
   FACTORS
                                                                                                                                                             ~
                                                                                                                                                             O)
TableA.1                                                                                                                                                     CO
Mechanical Unit Systems                                                                                                                                      m
                                                                                                                                                             z
                                                                                                                                                             m
                                                                                                   Absolute                                                  :o
                                                                                                                                                             G')
                                   Mks                              Cgs                            engineering                 Engineering*
                                                                                                                                                             ~
                                                                                                                                                             "TI
Primary quantities and                                                                                                                                       :o
their uni ts :                                                                                                                                               o
                                                                                                                                                             s::
  Length                           Meter, m                         Centimeter, cm                 Foot, ft                    Foot, ft                      z
  Mass                             Kilogram, kg                     Gram, g                                                    Pound mass, lbm
                                                                                                                                                             ~
  Time                             Second, sec                      Second, sec                    Second, sec                 Second, sec                   e
                                                                                                                                                             :o
  Force                                                                                            Pound force, lbf            Pound force, lbf              m
                                                                                                                                                             -I
Newton's second law,                                                                                                                                         o
      l                                                                                                                                                      s::
F= -ma                             gc := l                          gc := l                        gc := l                     gc = 32.17 ft-lbm/lbf-sec 2   )>
                                      (selected)                       (selected)                     (selected)                  (experimental)
                                                                                                                                                             z
   gc
                                                                                                                                                                   ~
Secondary quantities and
their uni ts:
  Force                            kg-m/sec 2                       g-cm/sec 2
  Mass                                                                                             lbf-sec 2 /ft
  Energy, W = FX                   kg-m 2 /sec 2                    g-cm 2 /sec 2                  ft-lbf                      ft-lbf
  Power, W = W/t                   kg-m 2 /sec 3                    g-cm 2 /sec 3                  ft-lbf/sec                  ft-lbf/sec

Aliases:
  Force
  Mass
                                   l newton     =  l kg-m/sec 2     l dyne := l g-cm/sec 2
                                                                                                   l slug := l lbf-sec 2 /ft
  Energy                           l joule := l kg-m 2 /sec 2
                                           = l newton-m
                                                                    l erg   = l g-cm 2 /sec 2
                                                                            = l dyne-cm
  Power                            l watt := l kg-m 2 /sec 3
                                           = l joule/sec

* A body having a weight of 1 lbf on the surface of the earth will have a mass of approxinfately 1 !hm.
                                                       \
                                UNIT SYSTEMS AND CONVERSION FACTORS               269



Table A.2
Electromagnetic-Unit System

Primary quantities and their units:
  Length                                Meter, m
  Mass                                  Kilogram, kg
  Time                                  Second, sec
  Charge                                Coulomb, coul
                                               I
Coulomb's law                           kc = - -
                                             4neo
  F12 -- ke Q1Q2
               2                        eo = 8.854 x 10- 12 coul2-sec 2 -kg- 1-m- 3
              T12


Secondary quantities and their units:
  Current, I = Q/t                      coul-sec- 1
  Electric field E                      kg-m-coul- 1 -sec- 2
    F= QE
  Electrical potential V                kg-m 2 -couI- 1-sec-2
    V=EX                                coul 2-sec-kg- 1-m - 3
  Resistance, R = V/I                   kg-m 2 -couI- 2-sec- 1
  Capacitance                           coul 2 -sec 2 -kg-1-m - 2
  lnductance                            kg-m 2 -cou1- 2

Aliases:
  Current                               1 amp  =  1 coul-sec- 1
  Electric potential                    1 volt = 1 kg-m 2 -couJ- 1-sec- 2
  Resistance                            1 ohm := 1 kg-m 2 -couI- 2 -sec- 1
  Capacitance                           1 farad  = 1 coul2-sec 2 -kg-1-m - 2
                                        1 henry := 1 kg-m 2 -coul - 2
  lnductance
                                      \
270     ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN




TableA.3
Selected Dimensionai Equivalents

Length                 1 m = 3.280 ft = 39.37 in
                       1 cm := 10- 2 m = 0.394 in = 0.0328 ft
                       1mm=10- 3 m
                       1 micron (µ) := 10- 6 m
                       1 angstrom (À) = 10-10 m
Time                   1 hr = 3,600 sec = 60 min
                       1 millisec = lo- 3 sec
                       1 microsec (µsec) := 10- 6 sec
                       1 nanosec (nsec) = l0- 9 sec
Mass                   1 kg:= 1,000 g = 2.2046 lbm = 6.8521 x 10- 2 slugs
                       1 slug = l lbf-sec 2 /ft = 32.174 lbm
Force                  1 newton := 1 kg-m/sec 2
                       1 dyne := 1 g-cm/sec 2
                       1 lbf = 4.448 x 10 5 dynes = 4.448 newtons
Energy                 1 joule := 1 kg-m 2 /sec 2
                       1 Btu := 778.16 ft-lbf = 1.055 x 10 10 ergs = 252 cal   •
                       1 cal := 4.186 joules = 0.00397 Btu
                       1 kcal := 4,186joules = 1,000 cal
                       1 erg := 1 g-cm 2 /sec 2
                       1 ev:::: 1.602 x 10- 19 joules
Power                  1 watt := 1 kg-m 2 /sec 3 = 1 joule/sec
                       1 hp := 550 ft-lbf/sec = 33,000 ft-lbf/min
                       1 hp = 2,545 Btu/hr = 746 watts
                       1 kw := 1,000 watts = 3,413 Btu/hr = 1.3405 hp
Pressure               1 atm := 14.696 lbf/in 2
                       1 mm Hg = 0.01934 lbf/in 2
                       1 dyne/cm 2 = 145.04 x 10- 7 lbf/in 2
                       1 bar = 14.504 lbf/in 2 := 10 6 dynes/cm 2
                       1 micron(µ) := 10- 6 m Hg= 10- 3 mm Hg
Volume                 1 gal = 0.13368 ft 3
                       1 liter = 1000.028 cm 3
READINGS




For a quaint peek at energy sciences:
"Order and Chaos," by S. W. Angrist and L. G. Hepler, Basic Books,
    Inc., New York.
For more background on energy technology:
"Energy and the Future," by A. L. Hammond et al., American Associa-
     tion for the Advancement of Science, Washington, 1973.
For more on energy resources:
"Energy in the United States: Sources, Uses and Policy Issues," by H. H.
     Landsberg and S. H. Shurr, Random House, New York, 1968.

                                                                    271
272 ENERGY: FROM NATURE TO MAN



"Resources and Man," by the Committee on Resources and Man,
    1
      W. H. Freeman and Company, San Francisco, 1969.
For the environmentalists view:
"Energy," by J. Holdren and P. Herrera, Sierra Club, San Francisco,
     1971.
For more on the earth's energy systems:
"Environmental Geoscience: lnteraction between Natural Systems and
     Man," by A. N. Strahler and A. H. Strahler, Hamilton, Santa
     Barbara, 1973.
"Energy Exchange in the Biosphere," by D. M. Gates, Harper and Row,
     New York, 1962.
For an analytical engineering view of the social science of energy :
"Environment, Power and Society," by H. T. Odum, Wiley-Interscience,
     New York, 1971.
                                                                       •
INDEX




Absorption:                         Conductivity:
  atmospheric, 255                    electrical, 190
  neutron, 225                        thermal, 77
Adiabatic flame temperature, 161    Control rods, 233
Adiabatic process, 161              Control volume, 6, 121
Alpha particles, 222                Convection, 76, 79
Alternating current, 193            Cooling towers, 136
Ampere, 186                         Coulomb's law, 181
Armature, 203                       Criticai point, 100
Atmosphere, energy in, 257          Cross section, 227
Atomic mass units (amu), 154, 220   Curie, 247                           •
Atomic weight, 154                  Current, electric, 186
Atoms, 152                          Cycles, 129
  conservation of, 156                binary, 134
A"~·   ility, 83                      Brayton, 138
                                      Rankine, 130
                                      topping, 141
Back work ratio, 131
Batteries, 169
                                    Decay, radioactive, 223
Beta particles, 222
                                    Density, mass, 48
Binary cycles, 134
                                    Detonation, 167
Biosphere, energy flows in, 24
                                    Deuterium, 244
Black body, 82
                                    Direct current, 186
Boiling, 98
                                    Direct energy conversion, 98, 209
Boiling water reactor, 234
                                    Dissociation, 162
Brayton cycle, 138
                                    Doubling period, 17
Breeder reactors, 240
Btu, 9
                                    Efficiency:
                                      compressors, 59
Calorie, 9                            cycle, 74
Capacitor, 198                        hydroelectric plant, 54
Carnot efficiency, 91                 isentropic, 124
Charge, 181                           motor, 187
Chemical bond, 154                    system, 9
Commutator, 204                       turbine, 57
Compressors, 59                       windmill, 49

                                                                   273
     274 INDEX                              --.i


     Ejectors, steam, 132        Half-life, 223
     Electtic field, 183, 195    Heat, 69
     Electron, 152, 218           of combustion, 164
     Electron volt, 220           conduction, 77
     Emissivity, 82               convection, 79
     Energy:                      of formation, 159
       availability, 85           pump, 74, 126
       balance, 8                 radiation, 82
       chemical, 151              specific, 110
       concept, 5                 waste, 135
       consu~ption, 13           Heat exchangers, 80
       free, 160
       internal, 67, 103, 110
       kinetic, 45               Ideai gas, 1O1
       molecular, 67             Induction, 197
       potential, 50             Inert substances, 154
       sources, 14               Internal energy, 67, 103
     Engines:                       of gases, 11 O
       diesel, 143                  of liquids, 110
       spark ignition, 142       Ionization, 67
       straticharge, 168         Ions, 154
       Wankel, 144               Irreversibility, 86
     Enthalpy, 108, 117          Isotopes, 155
       of combustion, 159
     Entropy, 87
       dimensions, 90            Joule, 9
       flows, 91
-,     production, 92
       specific, 103             Kilowatt, 11
     Equilibrium constant, 161   Kinetic energy, 45
     Evaporation, 67
     Exergy, 86
                                 Laminar flow, 79
                                 Langley, S., 254
     Fission, 226                Lbm, lbf, 44
     Flameholder, 165            Lbmole, 152
     Fluid, working, 57          Lean mixture, 162
     Force, 29, 34               Logarithmic plotting, 13
     Free energy, 160
     Fuel celi, 172
     Fusion, 226, 243            Macroscopic view, 67
                                 Magnetic field, 194
                                 Magnetohydrodynamics, 21 O
     Gamma particles, 22i        Mass:
     Gas, perfect, 101            conservation of, 119
     Gas turbine engines, 138     criticai, 232
     Generators, electric, 203    density, 48
     Gigawatt, 222                flow, 119
     Gmole, 156                  Megawatt, 22
                                                  ~         INDEX    275


     Moderator, 232               Radiation:
     Moisture, 107                  heat, 82, 252
     Molecules, 152                 solar, 252
     Moles, 156                   Radioactivity, 222
     Mollier diagram, 108         Radioisotopes, 242
     Motors, 206                  Ratio, back work, 131
                                  Reactants, 159
                                  Reactor, nuclear, 230
     Neutron, 152, 218                boiling water, 234
       prompt, 228                    breeder, 240
       thermal, 228                   gas cooled, 238
     Newton, I., 44                   pressurized water, 237
     Newton's law, 43             Regenerator, 140
     N ucleus, 218                Resistance, electrical, 188
                                  Reversible process, 86
                                  Rich mixtures, 162
     Octane rating, 167 ·
     Ohm's law, 188
     Otto cycle, 142              Saturated liquid, 106
                                  Saturated vapor, 106                     •
                                  Scattering, neutron, 225
     Pelton wheel, 55             Solar energy, 264
     Perfect gas, 101             Solar radiation, 252, 264
     Period, doubling, 1 7        Specific heat, 110
     Photosynthesis, 259          Steady state, 8
     Planck's equation, 221       Steam:
     Plasma, 67                     drum, 134
     Pollution, thermal, 74         properties, 111
     Positron, 223                  wet, 133
     Potential energy, 50         Stoichiometric mixture, 162
     Pound:                       Straticharge engine, 168
       force, 44                  Stress, 34
       mass, 44                   Su percritical vaporization, 100
     Power, 10                    Superheat, 130
       factor, 199                System, 5
     Precombustion chamber, 167
     Pressure, 35
       atmospheric, 35            Temperature, scales, 71
     Products of reaction, 159    Thermal pollution, 74
     Proton, 152, 218             Thermionic converter, 213
                                  Thermodynamic analysis, 97,
                                      112
     Quality, 107                 Thermoelectric converter, 212
                                  Three-phase power, 201
                                  Topping cycle, 141
~    Radiation:                   Torque, 56
       atomic, 247                Transformers, 200
       electromagnetic, 221       Triple point, 100


"'
    #lt?'4,ef'9k ~
        --276   INDEX



         Turbines, 54, 57
                                         l
                              Waste heat, 135
         Turbulent flow, 79   Watt, 11
                              Weight, 32
         Vapor cycles, 129     atomic, 154
         Vapor dome, 105       density, 52
         Voltage, 184         Work, 36
         Volume flow, 53      Working fluid, 97




                                                  •




    (
'
